LIVING THELIGHTINLIL Quark-FM  1/22/01  8:42 AM  Page iLIL Quark-FM  1/22/01  8:42 AM  Page iiShakti Gawain
with Laurel King
NATARAJ PUBLISHING
A DIVISION OF
NEW WORLD LIBRAR Y
NOV ATO ,CA94949
LIVING THELIGHT
A Guide to Personal and Planetary TransformationINLIL Quark-FM  1/22/01  8:42 AM  Page iiiNataraj Publishing
A Division of
New World Library
14 Pamaron W ay
Novato, CA 94949
Revised Edition ©1998 Shakti Gawain and Laurel King
Original Edition ©1986 Shakti Gawain and Laurel King
Cover Art: Nicholas Wilton
Cover Design: Michele Wetherbee
Back Cover Photograph: Max O’Neill
All rights reserved.
Library of Congress-in-Publication Data
Gawain, Shakti, 1948 —
Living in the light : a guide to personal and planetary
transformation / Shakti Gawain, with Laurel King. — Completely rev.
and updated.
p. cm.
ISBN 1-57731-046-2 (alk. paper) 1. Self-actualization (Psychology).
2. Meditation. I. King, Laurel. II. Title.
BF637.S4G392   1998 98-38364158. 1 — dc21 CIP
First Printing, September 1998
Printed in Canada on acid-free paper
ISBN 1-57731-046-2
Distributed to the trade by Publishers Group West
10   9   8   7   6   5   4   3   2   1   
LIL Quark-FM  1/22/01  8:42 AM  Page ivThis book is dedicated 
to the wisdom within us all.LIL Quark-FM  1/22/01  8:42 AM  Page vLIL Quark-FM  1/22/01  8:42 AM  Page viAcknowledgments
Iwould like to acknowledge Laurel King for her help with the
original edition of this book. I appreciate Lora O’Connor for hermany valuable suggestions and overall support in creating thisrevised edition. I’m very grateful to Becky Benenate, my editor forthe revised edition, for all her help and especially her willingness towork with my schedule and pull off a miracle of timing! Thanksto Katherine Dieter for her input, and to Marc Allen for his ongo-ing support. Kathy Altman, as always, has contributed her ideasand energy to the project. Jim Burns, thank you for your love andencouragement. Most of all I thank my readers, whose love andappreciation has been my inspiration and my reward.
vii
LIL Quark-FM  1/22/01  8:42 AM  Page viiContents
Author’s Preface to the Revised Edition   1
Introduction    4
Part One — The Principles
— A New W ay of Life    27— The Higher Power Within Us    33— Intuition    37— Becoming a Creative Channel    44— Exploring Our Many Selves    55— The World as Our Mirror    63— Spirit and Form    75— The Male and Female Within    86— Men and Women    98— East and West: A New Challenge    108
1
23456789
10LIL Quark-FM  1/22/01  8:42 AM  Page viiiPart Two — Living the Principles
11 — Trusting Intuition    11512 — Feelings    13013 — Balancing Being and Doing    13814 — Authoritarian and Rebel    14315 — Relationships    14916 — Our Children    16817 — Work and Play    17918 — Money    18819 — Health    20520 — Y our Perfect Body    21421 — Life and Death    22422 — Transforming Our World    22823 — A Vision    242
Recommended Resources    243
LIL Quark-FM  1/22/01  8:42 AM  Page ixLIL Quark-FM  1/22/01  8:42 AM  Page x1Author’s Preface
to the Revised Edition
Living in the Light was first published in 1986. Since that time, it
has sold over a million copies, and has been translated into manylanguages all over the world. T oday, it continues to sell steadily andI receive continuous feedback that it is touching people’s lives in ameaningful way.
Not long ago, I revised and updated my first book,
Creative
Visualization, and ever since that time, I’ve been feeling that I’d like
to do the same for Living in the Light. The basic message of the
book seems to be as timely and relevant as ever. Over the yearssince I wrote it, however, my understanding has developed and(hopefully) deepened through my own life experience and my work
LIL Quark-FM  1/22/01  8:42 AM  Page 12•Living in the Light
with others. I felt that there were many things I would say some-
what differently now, and that perhaps it would be valuable to myreaders to hear more of my ongoing story as well as some of my“older and wiser” perspective.
Having updated these two books, I now realize that revising a
classic book is a delicate and difficult art form quite different fromwriting one. The challenge is this: How do I bring it up to dateand into alignment with my present understanding while respect-ing and honoring the integrity and power of the original work,which in a sense is a living entity unto itself ?
When I sat down to revise 
Living in the Light , I hadn’t read it
for a number of years. As I went through it, I had two distinctreactions. One response was, “Wow! This is really good! I forgotthat I was saying this stuff so clearly way back then.” The otherresponse was an embarrassed wince when I felt I had said some-thing a little too simplistic or grandiose, or found something I nolonger agreed with.
I have not made major changes to the book. I have extended
and updated my story in the Introduction, and reorganized a little,adding a chapter and taking out two others that no longer fit well.Otherwise, I have simply reworked it a bit — adding, subtracting,and editing to bring it more into alignment with my current views.I have only modified it where I strongly felt it could be improvedor made more accurate.
At times, I had to fight the temptation to simply write a whole
new book on the same subject! I comforted myself with thethought that readers interested in a more complete view of how myLIL Quark-FM  1/22/01  8:42 AM  Page 2ideas have evolved can easily find it in one of my newer works,
such as The Path of Transformation or Creating True Prosperity.
Those of you who have read Living in the Light in the original
version may notice a slightly different tone to the revised edition.At the time I wrote the book, I was filled with youthful enthusiasmfor the power I was finding in these ideas and practices. A dozenyears later, I’m as enthusiastic and committed to these ideas as ever,but I now have a healthy respect for the ongoing challenge of inte-grating them into our daily lives. So you may notice a somewhathumbler approach, acknowledging and honoring the complexitiesof life and the human journey.
Probably the greatest difference for me between then and now
is my understanding of the necessity and importance of acknowl-edging, working with, and embracing our disowned energies, our“shadow side.” At this point, the phrase 
living in the light has a
deeper and subtler meaning for me than before. It refers to theconsciousness and balance that comes into our lives as we becomeaware of, accept, and express the many aspects of who we are,including the parts that we may have feared and rejected.
When I wrote this book, the millennium change was still years
away. Now it is at hand, and the idea that we are creating a newworld seems more relevant than ever.
Whether you have read 
Living in the Light before and are curi-
ous to read the revised version, or are a first-time reader, welcome!I hope you enjoy the book and find inspiration on your journey ofself-discovery.Author’s Preface   •   3LIL Quark-FM  1/22/01  8:42 AM  Page 3Introduction
The Beginning of My Journey
Ihave always had a burning desire to understand how the universe
works, what life is all about, and the meaning and purpose forwhich I am here. In retrospect, I can see that my entire life has beendevoted to my search for truth and understanding.
I was brought up in a very intellectual, well-educated, non-
religious family. My parents were essentially atheists, and very earlyon, I remember having the attitude that a belief in God was ahuman fabrication, a fantasy, a superstition created to help people
4LIL Quark-FM  1/22/01  8:42 AM  Page 4feel better about the totally unexplained, and unexplainable,
predicament we seem to find ourselves in. Human existence, or anyother kind of existence, was simply an accident of nature and hadno particularly fathomable meaning. I preferred to admit that Ididn’t know how we got here or why, rather than to adopt a sim-plistic explanation merely to gain a sense of security. I believed thattruth was rational and anything that couldn’t be proved scientifi-cally didn’t exist. I also felt somewhat condescending toward peo-ple who were weak enough to have to make up a god to believe in.
The positive side of this upbringing was that I didn’t get a lot
of the rigid dogma and deeply negative messages about right andwrong, heaven and hell, and sin that so many people receive in theirearly religious training. On the other hand, I had no conscious con-cept or experience of the spiritual dimension of life, and no answersfor the questions I had about the meaning and purpose of my life.
My parents really wanted a child, and were very loving to me.
Unfortunately they were unable to work out their own relationshipand were divorced when I was two years old. Although I don’tremember it clearly, I know this event had a major impact on mylife and affected my later patterns in relationship. After the divorce,I lived with my mother who never remarried or had any other chil-dren. My father did remarry, and I often visited my father and hisother family.
My mother developed a successful career as a city planner in the
days when there were few women in that field. She dealt with theusual challenges of single parenting — trying to balance the needsof her child with the demands of her work. Being the only child ofIntroduction   •   5LIL Quark-FM  1/22/01  8:42 AM  Page 5a working mother, I developed a strong sense of responsibility and
self-sufficiency quite early.
My mother is a very adventurous person. She loves to try new
things, and for me, she was a great role model of fearlessness andpioneer spirit. She had been one of the first educated Americanwomen in her generation to have natural childbirth. I was the firstbaby her doctor had ever delivered without an anesthetic. I wasblessed with a very fortunate birth. (On September 30, 1948, at9:10 p.m. in Trenton, New Jersey, for all you astrologers!)
My mother loves to explore new places and we traveled a lot
when I was a child — all over the United States, to the WestIndies, Mexico, Hawaii, Europe. We also moved frequently when-ever my mother changed jobs. Until I was about fifteen, I had neverlived in one place longer than two or three years.
My mother’s family had been Quakers and we still used the
“plain language” when speaking to my grandmother (saying “thee”rather than “you” for the Quakers is an acknowledgement of thegod within each person). So, on a deep level, I absorbed the pro-found respect for spirit and concern for humanity that is woveninto the fabric of the Quaker religion, which I feel had a stronginfluence on me later in my life.
When I was fourteen years old I went through an enormous
emotional crisis. Triggered initially by the collapse of my firstromance (with an “older” man of nineteen — I was sure no onewould ever compare), it snowballed into a deep and long-lastingexistential despair. I took a long hard look at life and recognizedthat there was really no point or meaning to it. I could see that all6•Living in the LightLIL Quark-FM  1/22/01  8:42 AM  Page 6the things that were supposed to provide significance in life — edu-
cation, success, relationships, money — were in themselvesephemeral, meaningless, and empty. There didn’t seem to be any-thing else to fill the void. I was deeply disillusioned and depressed,and basically remained in that state for several years.
In retrospect, I can see that I was going through an experience
that all of us must pass through at one time or another (or manytimes) — what mystics call the piercing of the veil of illusion. It’sthe point where we begin to recognize that our physical world isnot the ultimate reality and we turn inward to discover the spiritu-al aspect of our existence. At these times, we usually feel, emo-tionally, that we are hitting bottom, but as we actually hit bottomit’s as if we fall through a trap door into a new place — the innerrealm of the soul, where we can begin to explore our connectionto life in a whole new way. When we can face our fears and movethrough such a “dark night of the soul,” we are greeted by thedawn of a profound new adventure.
New Experiences
Over the next few years, I began to have new experiences, open-
ings, a growing awareness that did not fit into my former rationalframework. In college, I studied psychology and got involved in someencounter groups and sensitivity training groups that, in additionto allowing me to release old emotional pain, led me to new feelingsof love, joy, and oneness with all. I studied dance and discovered thatwhen I was dancing, I would often have an exhilarating feeling, as ifIntroduction   •   7LIL Quark-FM  1/22/01  8:42 AM  Page 7some higher force had taken over and was moving me in an aban-
doned and thrilling way.
I had always been interested in Eastern philosophy, so I read
books about Buddhism and Hinduism. I practiced yoga and med-itation and found that they helped me feel more centered, relaxed,and in tune with myself. After graduating from college I spent twoyears traveling around the world, living for several months in India,where I gained a deep awareness of the eastern mystical tradition.My travels were a powerful experience for me because with littlemoney and no real plans, I lived by following my intuition. I hadset off originally for a vacation in Italy and ended up making atwo-year journey around the world. I learned that I could live hap-pily with virtually no possessions and move safely into unknownplaces. This was one of my earliest experiences of the synergisticthings that happen when we trust our inner guidance and followthe flow of our energy.
Getting Conscious
When I returned to the United States, I was hooked on some-
thing called “consciousness.” I couldn’t have defined what it wasbut I knew that I wanted more of it and that for me, nothing elsemattered as much as my process of personal growth. I felt that ifI pursued external goals such as career, money, or relationships,they would ultimately feel empty, whereas if I devoted myself tomy own development I would ultimately have the things that myheart desired such as loving relationships, meaningful work, and a8•Living in the LightLIL Quark-FM  1/22/01  8:42 AM  Page 8sense of abundance, and that it would all come about in a more
satisfying way.
I was motivated not only by my yearning to find greater ful-
fillment in my own life, but by a strong desire to make a contribu-tion toward positive change in the world and in other people’shealing and happiness.
I moved to the San Francisco Bay area, which I recognized as
the forefront of the so-called “human potential movement,” andplunged into the earnest pursuit of knowledge, wisdom, healing,and transformation. I took classes and workshops, avidly read newbooks, meditated, and talked constantly to others involved in thesame process. After reading 
Handbook to Higher Consciousness by
Ken Keyes, I went to live at his center in Berkeley where we workedon our growth intensely, day and night, for a year. After that, I con-tinued to live communally for several years with others who wereinvolved in an intensive personal development process. During thistime, I did whatever I could to make enough money to live on —housework, office work, odds and ends — while I focused on myreal work.
Since that time, over twenty-five years ago, my life has been
dedicated to my growth and evolution as a conscious being. I grad-ually came to understand that becoming more conscious meantbecoming more aware of all that was taking place within me andaround me, how my inner world affected my outer world and viceversa. I realized that the more 
awareness I have, the more choice I
have in how I create or respond to the circumstances of my life.When we are relatively unconscious, we simply do what we’veIntroduction   •   9LIL Quark-FM  1/22/01  8:42 AM  Page 9always done, not realizing there is any other way. As we gradually
become more aware, we begin to recognize that other options existand we can make other choices in how we live.
At first, I imagined that this process involved a straight line
from A to B, A being the darkness of ignorance, and B being full“enlightenment.” The goal was to move from A to B as directly aspossible. If we were dedicated and fortunate enough to achieveenlightenment, we would have completed the process; we would beradiant beings, always filled with light, love, and wisdom.
Eventually, I understood that consciousness is an ever-
unfolding, deepening, and expanding process with no end point.We are infinite and complex beings, and our human journeyinvolves not just a spiritual awakening, but the development of
all
levels of our being — spiritual, mental, emotional, and physical —and the integration of all these aspects into a healthy and balanceddaily life.
I’m getting ahead of myself, however, so back to my story.
My Name
People often ask me about my name so I thought I’d pause here
and tell you about it.
While in India, I became very fascinated with the Hindu reli-
gion and began to study it. I had not been raised as a Christian,and that religion had never held much interest for me. I liked someof the ideas in Buddhism a lot, but it seemed a bit intellectual tome. The myths, symbols, and deities in the Hindu religion touched10 •Living in the LightLIL Quark-FM  1/22/01  8:42 AM  Page 10me in a deeper place in my soul. It is a very complex religion and
I don’t even pretend to understand it, but I grasped a few things.
In the Hindu religion there is a trinity of three main deities
that symbolize three aspects of life. Brahma is the creator, Vishnuis the preserver, and Shiva is the destroyer. Shiva represents theconstant changing of the universe, the fact that everything mustconstantly be destroyed in order to be reborn. He reminds us thatwe must constantly let go of everything we hold on to, in order toflow with the motion of life. Many of his fervent devotees give uphome and possessions and wander freely, abandoning themselvesto following and trusting the energy of the universe. Shiva is alsoknown as Nataraj — the Lord of the Dance (literally, the Lord ofRhythm). They say that it is his dance that keeps the universe inmotion. He is depicted as a very beautiful and powerful man withlong flowing hair. (It is said that out of his hair flows the holyGanges river.) I felt irresistibly drawn to him.
Shakti is the feminine aspect of Shiva. The word “shakti”
means “energy” — the energy that everything in the universe ismade of. It is the energy of life — the life force running throughour bodies. It also means “female energy.” In the Hindu practiceof T antra, there are techniques for enlightenment through chan-neling one’s sexual energy. In this practice, the man is referred to asShiva and the woman as Shakti.
When I returned from India I met, and for several years lived
with, my friend Marc Allen. He didn’t think my previous name fitme and, knowing of my “love affair” with Shiva, he began callingme Shakti. I liked it and began using it. At the time, I don’t thinkIntroduction   •   11LIL Quark-FM  1/22/01  8:42 AM  Page 11I realized how powerful the name was, but I certainly realize it now.
I feel that the vibration of the name has helped me to emerge intomy power.
Gawain is the last name I was born with. It is the same name
as Sir Gawain in the King Arthur legends. According to one dic-tionary definition, it means “battle hawk,” which I think is a won-derful image. T o me, Shakti represents my feminine aspect, andGawain, my masculine aspect.
Creative Visualization
One of the earliest workshops I took was the Silva Mind
Control Course. At that time, I was still rather skeptical aboutthis sort of thing and probably would never have gone to it exceptthat my mother had taken the course and highly recommended itto me. I will never forget her description of a technique in whichyou can imagine what you want to have happen and it will veryoften come about. My mind felt doubtful about this but my heartmade a leap and I remember thinking, “Ever since I was a child, Ialways 
knew that there was magic — that somehow, somewhere,
magic really exists. This sounds like the closest thing to it that Ihave ever heard of.”
I took the course and I was amazed! We started slowly and
easily with simple techniques that anyone could accept and do, andgradually, we worked our way into more unexplainable, but verypowerful, processes. After five days, I had a strong psychic experiencein which, for a period of several hours, I was able to consistently pick12 •Living in the LightLIL Quark-FM  1/22/01  8:42 AM  Page 12up specific information that I had no way of knowing except
through my intuition. That experience began to dissolve some of myformer limits on what I thought was possible.
The most important technique I learned in that course was the
basic technique of creative visualization — relaxing deeply and thenpicturing a desired goal in your mind exactly the way you want it tobe. I started to practice this technique and found that it was amaz-ingly effective. Quite often the things I pictured came true quicklyand in unexpected ways. I became fascinated with the possibilitiesand took some other classes and workshops on similar subjects. Ibegan to use creative visualization techniques in my life regularlyand to teach them to my friends. I read 
The Nature of Personal
Reality by Jane Roberts and was powerfully affected by the idea that
we all create our own reality. Soon, I began to lead workshops anddo private counseling, and eventually wrote
Creative Visualization.
When I got the idea to write the book, I just wanted to gather
all the ideas and techniques I had learned from various sources andput them down on paper in a comprehensive way. I thought I wouldwrite a little booklet I could give to friends and perhaps sell to myclients and a few interested people. As I wrote it, I was filled withself-doubt: “Who am I to be writing a book like this? I’m noexpert.” Some force inside of me kept pushing me to do it, how-ever, so I did. I used creative visualization techniques to help createthe book. I got an artist friend to design the cover. Then, I hungthe cover up on my wall and kept imagining and affirming that thebook was already finished. I found writing it was fairly effortless(except for my nagging doubts) and before I knew it, it had turnedIntroduction   •   13LIL Quark-FM  1/22/01  8:42 AM  Page 13into a real book that some friends and I published together.
What I didn’t fully realize at the time was that the book was
coming from a higher creative source within me. On a personalitylevel, I had doubts and fears, but because of my inner commitmentto myself, I was willing to go ahead and follow the creative energyanyhow. Because I had a natural ability to think and write clearly,was really interested in these ideas, had a good background in thesubject, and was willing to take some risks, the universe could useme as a creative channel.
The publishing process was similar. My friends, Marc Allen
and Jon Bernoff, and I knew very little about business or publish-ing, and had no money at all, but we had a desire to write and pub-lish our own books. By trusting our feelings and being willing torisk acting on them, we found that we were led, step by step, inwhat we needed to do. We made many mistakes in the process(mostly when we 
didn’t follow our inner guidance) and some of
them were painful and extremely expensive, but, eventually, we cre-ated a successful publishing company, originally named WhateverPublishing, Inc., now called New World Library.
Creative Visualization has been successful far beyond any wild
fantasy I might have had at the time I wrote it. Although it wasnever marketed or publicized in any significant way, other thanthrough word of mouth, at the time of this writing it has soldnearly three million copies and has been translated into over twen-ty-five foreign languages. Twenty years after its original publicationin 1978, the revised edition is still selling steadily. Through theyears, I have received countless letters and calls from people all over14 •Living in the LightLIL Quark-FM  1/22/01  8:42 AM  Page 14the world saying it has helped them transform their lives. Of
course, this has been quite gratifying to me, especially because Ican see that it is the higher power of the universe at work. I havefelt like a proud mother, watching my child out there in the world,doing its work and making its fortune, knowing that it is mine andyet not mine. It came through me and I helped to form it, and yetit is a being, an entity of its own, with its own destiny and its ownconnection to the creative source.
Listening to Inner Guidance
When I first discovered the techniques of creative visualization
and found that they worked, I was excited because I felt thatthrough using them I could create whatever I wanted in my life. Iwas elated by the feeling that I could have everything I desired!
This was an important step for me as it took me out of the
essentially powerless attitude that I had had previously — the atti-tude that life is something that happens to you and that all you cando is make the best of it. It was in some ways a victim position —giving power to people and things outside of myself. Using creativevisualization, I began to realize that the power rested in me, that Icould choose to create my life the way I wanted it to be. It was veryempowering and very freeing.
As I explored the process of creating my own reality, I grad-
ually began to realize that the creative power I was feeling wascoming from a source other than just my personality. For onething, some of the things I
thought I wanted didn’t manifest; and,Introduction   •   15LIL Quark-FM  1/22/01  8:42 AM  Page 15in retrospect, I could see that it was for my highest good that they
didn’t happen. Other things occurred so miraculously that it was asif some unseen force was putting everything in place. Sometimes Iwould have flashes of insight and awareness, or future visions, thatwere highly accurate and seemed to come from a source deep with-in myself. I became more and more interested in discovering whatthis creative force was all about and how it worked. I began to real-ize that “it” (my soul, or higher self) seemed to know more than“I” (my personality self) did about a lot of things. I saw that itwould probably be smart to try to find out what that inner guid-ance was telling me, and follow it. Every time I did that, it seemedto work.
Eventually, I lost interest in trying to control my life, to make
things happen in a way that I thought I wanted them to happen. Ibegan to practice surrendering to the higher power of the universewithin me and finding out what “it” wanted me to do. I discoveredthat, in the long run, it really wasn’t that different. The universealways seems to want me to have everything I truly want, and itseems to know how to guide me in creating it more effectively thanI would know how to create it myself. The emphasis is different,though. Instead of figuring out what I wanted, setting goals, andtrying to control what happened to me, I began to practice tuningin receptively to my intuition and acting on what it told me with-out always understanding why I was doing what I was doing. It wasa feeling of letting go of control, surrendering, and allowing thehigher power to be in charge.
About this time, I met a woman named Shirley Luthman who16 •Living in the LightLIL Quark-FM  1/22/01  8:42 AM  Page 16became a very important teacher to me. She led a group each week
and I began to go to it faithfully and continued to do so for fiveyears. She taught me a great deal about how to trust and follow myown intuitive sense. Many of the ideas in
Living in the Light , includ-
ing the concept of male and female in the way I use it, wereinspired by Shirley, and I am deeply grateful for what she taughtme.
Trusting Myself
After several years with Shirley, I had to confront the fact that
there were things that were happening in the group that didn’t feelright to me, and that I couldn’t find a way to give my input thatwas received. I found myself confronting the age-old problem ofhow to let go of the “guru.” I respected Shirley so much, and whatI had received from her had been so valuable, that it was very dif-ficult to face the time when I knew that I could not look to her foranswers anymore. In a sense, Shirley was the metaphysical motherwho had given me the support and security I needed until I wasready to trust myself.
Eventually, my inner guidance told me I had to stop relying on
her. The time had come for me to trust the power of my own innerguidance. It was both terrifying and liberating to realize that I hadmy own path and there was no one ahead of me who had all theanswers.
Living in the Light
Once
CreativeVisualization became popular, many people beganIntroduction   •   17LIL Quark-FM  1/22/01  8:42 AM  Page 17asking me to write another book. About two years after Creative
Visualization was published, I began to have strong feelings that I
would do so. One day as I was walking in the woods, I was thinkingabout my new book and I wondered idly what I should call it.Suddenly, my attention was drawn to a patch of woods near the pathwhere a ray of sunlight was filtering brightly through the trees andshining on the green leaves. It was a beautiful sight and as I gazed,the words
“living in the light” came to me. I knew immediately that
it was the title of my next book and I remember the feeling that Ihadn’t really thought of it myself but that I had “received” it. I evenhad the impression that I didn’t have much choice about i t... that
I was being directed to use that name!
I felt very inspired, began to make some notes, and told people
that I was working on my new book. My publishing company hada cover designed and began to do some preliminary promotion. Butafter a while, I noticed that I hadn’t actually written anything! I keptthinking it was going to happen, but it didn’t. The truth was, I wasnot feeling the energy to actually sit down and write, and noamount of thinking that I “should” do it was making it happen. Bythis time in my life, I was quite committed to the philosophy thatlife doesn’t have to be a struggle. I felt that when it was ready to hap-pen, it would happen naturally. I wasn’t willing to do it if it felt liketoo much of a push; I sensed that the moment would come whenthe energy would be so strong that I wouldn’t be able
notto write.
Several years went by, and I became involved in many other
things. People continued to ask for my new book and I kept reas-suring them that it would be along eventually. Privately, I sometimes18 •Living in the LightLIL Quark-FM  1/22/01  8:42 AM  Page 18had my doubts, and I had to accept the fact that it was possible
that it wouldn’t happen. Still, I felt that it would.
Writing this book was a little like being pregnant. I could feel
something forming and growing inside of me and I knew that Iwas creating even though nothing seemed to be happening exter-nally. The baby would emerge when it was fully formed and ready.
Finally, seven years after the publication of
Creative Visualiza-
tion, the time had come to write Living in the Light. At this point
in my life, I was extremely busy and had little time to devote towriting. Still, this book would not be stopped!
Laurel King, a friend who had been working for me for a few
years, helped me get my notes and ideas gathered together anddown on paper, and contributed her own creative ideas and exer-cises. I found a few days or a few hours here and there to write. Iwas spending a lot of time flying all over the world to lead work-shops, so much of
Living in the Light was written on airplanes.
As in writing my first book, I had to deal with fears and 
doubts that occasionally besieged me. This time, instead of wor-rying whether I had the right or credibility to share my knowledge,I had the opposite problem. With 
Creative Visualization proving to
be wildly successful, I wondered whether my second book wouldlive up to that standard, or would perhaps be a total flop! I nowunderstood one aspect of the difficulties that can accompanyfame, and the pressure that all successful creative people face tokeep producing successful work.
In spite of the obstacles, the book seemed to flow from that
deep creative source within me. It was published in 1986, by ourIntroduction   •   19LIL Quark-FM  1/22/01  8:42 AM  Page 19company, New World Library. By this time, we knew a lot more
about publishing! Still, we didn’t do a great deal of publicity ormarketing. This book, however, seemed to have a life and a des-tiny of its own. Like 
Creative Visualization, it sold mainly through
word of mouth. Along with Creative Visualization, it has become
known as a classic in the field of personal growth.
Naturally, I am very pleased by the fact that Living in the Light
has reached so many people and encouraged them in their person-al growth process. Some of my most precious moments have beenwhen someone approaches me at a workshop and tells me, withtears in their eyes, that this book has been like a good friend tothem, helping them through a particularly dark or challenging timein their life. I feel so grateful that the universe has guided me on apath where by sharing my own learning process, I have been ableto make a contribution to other people’s lives.
My Journey Continues
Meanwhile, the success of my second book had made me
busier than ever. I was spending most of my time leading work-shops. I had found that passing along to others what I was learn-ing was a very important and challenging part of my own growthprocess. My workshops continued to evolve and change as I did,since I was always teaching what I was learning. I love working withpeople on deep levels of change, growth, and transformation, andI devoted myself to my work.
Eventually, I found that I had become a workaholic, and my20 •Living in the LightLIL Quark-FM  1/22/01  8:42 AM  Page 20work was consuming my life. Much as I loved my career, I began
to feel an increasing sense of imbalance in my life. I was great atgiving to the world, but had a hard time creating enough space forreceiving, so I began to burn out. I longed for more quiet time, timefor myself and my own personal needs. Y et, I had a hard time say-ing “no” to all the exciting work opportunities that came my way.
For quite some time, I had been longing to find the right man
to be my partner in life. I had been visualizing him ever since Ilearned that technique, but somehow he hadn’t shown up! I wasalmost always in a relationship; they were all deep learning/healingexperiences for me, and all were wonderful in certain ways. For onereason or another, however, they weren’t quite right for a long-termcommitment. I couldn’t understand why I felt so ready for a com-mitted relationship and yet it wasn’t happening for me.
It took me a long time to realize that I wasn’t really ready at all.
In fact, I had deep conflict and ambivalence about commitment,and a lot of emotional healing to do in the area of relationships,going back to my parents’ divorce, and even before that, to old family patterns. I went through a period where I devoted myself tomy emotional healing process, including deep work in therapy.
At this time, some wonderful teachers came into my life —
a couple named Dr. Hal and Dr. Sidra Stone. They had bothbeen therapists for many years and had developed a body ofwork called the Psychology of Selves, and a very powerful tech-nique called V oice Dialogue. From the Stones’ teachings, I beganto understand more clearly that we all have many different ener-gies, or selves, within us. V oice Dialogue provides an amazing wayIntroduction   •   21LIL Quark-FM  1/22/01  8:42 AM  Page 21to get directly in touch with these different selves, become more
conscious of them, and bring them into greater balance. Throughthis work, I discovered many fascinating things about myself andbecame much more aware of what was going on inside of me. Thisbrought me tremendous healing and growth.
The Stones have a very developed understanding of the dynam-
ics of human relationship and how our relationships mirror ourconsciousness. Using their work enabled me to resolve manyaspects of my own relationship issues. Hal and Sidra Stone havebecome good friends and I consider them my mentors. I highly rec-ommend their books, tapes, and workshops (which are listed in theRecommended Resources section of this book) and I have inte-grated their work into my own writing and workshops.
After doing a great deal of deep work, I began to feel a major
shift taking place within me. I was more aware than ever of the dif-ferent parts of myself and I felt increasingly comfortable with allof them. I was aware of my power and independence, but also ofmy vulnerability and need. I felt more able to love all aspects ofwho I am, and more able to be 
withmyself in a whole new way.
At this point, I had a knowingness that I was ready for a com-
mitted partnership (I was still unable to use the “m” word — mar-riage — however!). This felt very different than the experience Ihad had for so long of
thinking I was ready. Now I sensed that my
partner would be coming along soon.
Less than a month later, I connected with Jim Burns, a bright,
handsome, and loving man whom I had met a couple of yearsbefore but hadn’t seen in the interim. Actually, I had met him22 •Living in the LightLIL Quark-FM  1/22/01  8:42 AM  Page 22because of this book! He had read Living in the Light while living
in Minnesota, and came out to California to one of my work-shops. T o make a long and romantic story short, we fell in love andwere married within a year.
Being in a committed relationship has been a powerful experi-
ence of growth for me. I truly understand now that deep relation-ship is the clearest mirror we have, and therefore, the greatest pathto consciousness. This, however, is a topic for another book.
I now divide my time between our home and office in Calif-
ornia, our beautiful home on the island of Kauai, and traveling tolead workshops around the world. I am most excited about thein-depth work that takes place in the intensive programs I conductin Hawaii and California, and my two-year mentoring prog ram.
The primary focus of my work now is on becoming conscious
of the many different aspects of who we are, and learning to devel-op and express the infinite energies within us. This involves a greatdeal of what is often called “shadow” work — becoming aware ofthe parts of ourselves that we have denied or repressed because wefeel they are unacceptable, and learning to value them and makethem part of our lives. This healing work brings us into a greaterand greater sense of balance and wholeness.
I understand, better than ever now, that “living in the light”
involves traveling into the darker places within ourselves, and shin-ing the light of our consciousness into them so that we can trulylove and express all that we are.
On this amazing human journey of ours, the strongest guiding
force we have is right within us. We gain access to it through ourIntroduction   •   23LIL Quark-FM  1/22/01  8:42 AM  Page 23intuitive sense, our “gut feelings” about what is right and true for
us. The development of our relationship with our inner guidanceis what this book is all about. May it serve you well ....
With love,
Shakti Gawain24 •Living in the LightLIL Quark-FM  1/22/01  8:42 AM  Page 24PART ONE
The PrinciplesLIL Quark-Part One  1/22/01  8:49 AM  Page 25LIL Quark-Part One  1/22/01  8:49 AM  Page 26Chapter One
A New Way of Life
W e are living in a very exciting and powerful time. On the
deepest level of consciousness, a radical transformation is takingplace. As the evolution of human consciousness gains greater andgreater momentum, we are being challenged, on a planetary level,to let go of our present way of life and create a new one. In a sense,our “old world” is dying, and a new world is coming into being.
For many of us, the old world was based on an external focus
— having lost our fundamental spiritual connection, we havebelieved that the material world is the only reality. Thus, feelingessentially lost, empty, and alone, we have continually attempted to
27LIL Quark-Part One  1/22/01  8:49 AM  Page 27find happiness and fulfillment through external “things” —
money, material possessions, relationships, work, fame, food,drugs, and so on.
The new world is being built as we open to the higher power
of the universe within us and consciously allow that creative ener-gy to move through us. As each of us connects with our inner spir-itual awareness, we learn that the creative power of the universe isinside of us. We also learn that we can create our own experienceof reality and take responsibility for doing so. The change beginswithin each individual, but as more and more individuals are trans-formed, the mass consciousness is increasingly affected.
My observation that a profound transformation of conscious-
ness is taking place in our world at this time is based on thechanges I see within myself, those around me, and in our society.It is affirmed by feedback I receive from thousands of people Iwork with all over the world.
Living in the Light is about this transformation of conscious-
ness, within each individual and in the world. My use of the terms“old world” and “new world” throughout the book refer to the oldway of living that we are relinquishing, and the new one that weare creating.
For many people, this time may be distressing, because the
world situation and/or our personal lives may seem to be goingfrom bad to worse. It’s as if many things are falling apart and willcontinue to do so with even greater intensity, but on the deepestlevel, I do not feel this is negative. It is upsetting to us to thedegree that we are emotionally attached to our old way of living28 •Living in the LightLIL Quark-Part One  1/22/01  8:49 AM  Page 28and steadfastly follow old patterns, rather than trying to open our
eyes to the profound changes that are occurring.
Paradoxical as it may seem, these changes are the greatest bless-
ing that any of us could possibly imagine. The truth is that theway of life that we have been following for centuries no longerworks. While appropriate for its time, it cannot take us where weneed and desire to go. The focus on materialism and the externalworld was necessary in a time when our primary challenge wasphysical survival. Our patriarchal values and the traditional roles ofmen and women may have been necessary in order to ensure theprotection of our families for a certain period of time in our evo-lutionary process.
At this time, many human beings (and other species as well) on
the earth are still struggling for physical survival. Y et there are anincreasing number of us who no longer have to be preoccupiedprimarily with sheer survival. We have the opportunity, and thusthe responsibility, to begin looking for deeper fulfillment on spir-itual, mental, and emotional levels. We are searching for greatermeaning and purpose in our lives, and for ways to live moreresponsibly and harmoniously on our planet.
While some people throughout history have led relatively
meaningful and satisfying lives, I’m afraid that most of us havenever found the fulfillment that we have yearned for. Our culturalconditioning has not given us the tools to develop a healthy con-nection with our inner realms of soul, intuition, and feeling, andto integrate them with our external world.
In a way, it’s as if we’ve been in school for our entire lives,A New Way of Life   •   29LIL Quark-Part One  1/22/01  8:49 AM  Page 29receiving an education that teaches the exact opposite of the way
the universe actually functions. We try to make things work aswe’ve been taught, and we may even enjoy some degree of success,but for most of us things never seem to work out as well as we hadhoped. That perfect relationship never materializes, or if it does,it soon sours or fades away. Or it may seem as though there is neverquite enough money; we never feel truly secure or abundant.Perhaps we don’t get the appreciation, recognition, or success thatwe want. Even if we do achieve some of these things, we still maysuffer from a vague sense that there must be something more, somedeeper meaning. Some of us may actually connect with that deep-er meaning and feel increasingly fulfilled and expanded by a grow-ing spiritual awareness. Nevertheless, there are stubborn andsometimes puzzling old patterns and areas of life where we expe-rience great pain and confusion.
Thus, our first task in building the new world is to admit that
our “life education” has not necessarily taught us a satisfying wayto live. We must learn a way of life that is very different from theway we approached things before. This may not be easy for us, andit will take time, commitment, and courage. Therefore, it’s veryimportant to be compassionate with ourselves, to continuallyremind ourselves what a tremendous task we are undertaking. Itwill not be accomplished overnight; in fact, it is a lifelong process.
Just as a baby learns to walk by falling down repeatedly, we must
remember that we are babies in the new world. We will learn bymaking lots of mistakes and often we may feel ignorant, frightened,or unsure of ourselves. But we would not get angry at a baby every30 •Living in the LightLIL Quark-Part One  1/22/01  8:49 AM  Page 30time he fell down (if we did, he’d probably never learn to walk with
full confidence and power), so we must try not to criticize ourselvesif we are not able to live and express ourselves as fully as we wishimmediately.
We are now learning to live more fully in accordance with the
laws of the universe. We are challenged to explore all aspects ofour human experience and to develop all levels of our being — thespiritual, mental, and emotional as well as the physical.
As we do this work, we experience an increasing sense of
wholeness, empowerment, aliveness, and a feeling of being “onpurpose” in our lives. So, although letting go of the old world mayseem difficult at times, it is well worth the commitment and hardwork it takes to gradually make this transition into the new world.
Meditation
Sit or lie down, relax, close your eyes, and take a few deep
breaths. As you exhale, imagine that you are letting go of every-thing that you don’t want or need. Easily, without effort, let anyfrustrations, tiredness, or worries melt away. This is a time torelease an old way of life that no longer works for you. Imaginethat your old ways, your old patterns, and all the obstacles toachieving what you truly want are gently dissolved and leaving yourbody with each breath. Every time you exhale, and release a littleof your old limitations, you create more space inside of you forsomething new.
After doing this for a few minutes, begin to imagine that everyA New Way of Life   •   31LIL Quark-Part One  1/22/01  8:49 AM  Page 31time you inhale you are breathing in life energy, the life force of the
universe. Within this life energy is everything you need and desire— love, power, health, beauty, strength, abundance. Breathe it inwith each inhalation. Imagine a new way of life opening up, fillingyou with aliveness, vitality, and energy. Pretend your life is exactlythe way you want it to be. Imagine this new life is here, now, andsavor it.
When the meditation feels complete, gently open your eyes
and come back into the room. See if you can retain that sense ofnewness in yourself. Remember that you are now in the process ofcreating a new life for yourself.32 •Living in the LightLIL Quark-Part One  1/22/01  8:49 AM  Page 32Chapter Two
The Higher Power Within Us
T he foundation for life in the new world is built on the under-
standing that there is a higher intelligence, a fundamental creativepower or energy in the universe that is the source and substance ofall existence. The words and concepts that have been used todescribe this power are innumerable. Here are just a few:
God Spirit Inner Guidance
Goddess Essence Higher SelfHigher Power Being The UniverseSource Soul Life Force
33
LIL Quark-Part One  1/22/01  8:49 AM  Page 33The T ao The Force Cosmic Intelligence
Buddha Nature The Light Christ ConsciousnessGreat Spirit I Am All That Is
These terms are attempts to express an experience or know-
ingness that is difficult to convey in words and rational concepts.Each of us has this experience within us; the words we choose todescribe it are merely the labels that suit us best.
I seldom use the word God, as it has so many confusing con-
notations for so many. Frequently, people associate it with earlyreligious training, which is no longer meaningful to them. Somemay think of God as 
someone or something outside of themselves: the
“old man in the sky with the long white beard.” I prefer terms suchas higher power, the universe, spirit, or inner guidance. In thisbook, I will use some of these terms interchangeably to refer to ourspiritual source, the essential creative intelligence and power with-in us. If any of these terms are not particularly meaningful to you,please feel free to substitute whatever word you prefer.
For the first twenty years of my life, my connection to the
spiritual aspect of my being was largely undeveloped. I had noconscious experience of, or belief in, a higher power of any sort. Ihave had to move through many levels of doubt, skepticism, dis-belief, and fear in order to arrive at the great trust I now have inthe higher power of the universe that is within me and withineveryone and everything that exists. I have not accepted anythingon blind faith, so in a sense I have had to “prove” everything tomyself through my life experiences. As I’ve learned to place my34 •Living in the LightLIL Quark-Part One  1/22/01  8:49 AM  Page 34The Higher Power Within Us   •   35
trust in the higher power of the universe and to live in accordance
with universal principles, the changes I have felt and seen in my lifeare truly miraculous.
Those of you who have felt deep spiritual awareness through-
out your lives already have a solid foundation to build upon. Forthose of you who have felt spiritually “disconnected” as I have, Ihope my words will support and encourage you to find this innerconnection for yourself. There is no specific way to do this; every-one’s experience is different. If this is something that you desire,ask within yourself that you be guided into an experience of yourown spiritual nature. This may take some time, but if you desireit, it will happen. The words and exercises in this book may helpyou with this.
The universe has both personal and impersonal aspects; as I
surrender and trust more, I find my relationship with this higherpower becoming more personal. I can sometimes sense a presencewithin me, guiding me, loving me, teaching me, encouraging me. Inthis personal aspect, the universe can be teacher, guide, friend,mother, father, lover, creative genius, or fairy godmother. In otherwords, many of my needs and desires can be fulfilled through thisinner connection. I often find the most powerful communion withthe universe when I am alone, especially out in nature. At suchtimes, the places inside of me that sometimes feel empty are filledwith the energy of spirit. Here I find a guiding presence thatnudges me in the direction I need to go, and helps me to learn thelesson that lies in taking each step along my path.LIL Quark-Part One  1/22/01  8:49 AM  Page 35Meditation
Sit or lie down in a comfortable position. Close your eyes and
take a few deep breaths. Each time you exhale, relax your bodymore and more. Then take a few more deep breaths and, each timeyou exhale, relax your mind. Let your thoughts drift by withoutholding onto any of them. Allow your mind to go out of focus.Relax your awareness into a deep place within you.
Imagine that there is a very powerful presence within you. This
presence is totally loving, strong, and wise. It is nurturing, pro-tecting, guiding, and caring for you. At times it can be very strongand forceful. It can also be very light, joyful, and playful. As youget to know and trust it, it will make your life exciting, meaning-ful, and fulfilling.
Y ou may get an image or a feeling or a physical sensation that
represents this higher presence. Even if you don’t see or feel athing, assume it is there regardless.
Relax and enjoy the feeling or thought that you are being total-
ly taken care of by the universe. Say this affirmation to yourselfsilently or aloud,
“I feel and trust the presence of the universe in my
life.”36 •Living in the LightLIL Quark-Part One  1/22/01  8:49 AM  Page 36Chapter Three
Intuition
O nce we acknowledge the higher power of the universe, the
obvious question arises: “How can we contact this power and gainaccess to it?” After all, if there is within us a superior wisdom or adeeper knowledge than we normally experience, by tapping into it,we should be able to receive valuable guidance in how to live well inthis confusing world. This realization began to dawn on me manyyears ago as I undertook my journey of consciousness. I have sincediscovered that the knowingness that resides in each of us can beaccessed through what we usually call our intuition. By learning tocontact, listen to, and act on our intuition, we can directly connectto this inner wisdom and allow it to become our guiding force.
37
LIL Quark-Part One  1/22/01  8:49 AM  Page 37This is where we find ourselves in opposition to life as most of
us have been taught to live it in the old world. In modern westerncivilization, we have learned to respect and even worship the ratio-nal, logical aspect of our being, and to dismiss, depreciate, or denyour intuition. We do acknowledge the ability of animals to seem-ingly understand things that are way beyond their rational capacity;we call this instinct. But it’s a mystery that defies
logical explanation,
so we shrug our shoulders and dismiss it as something vastly infe-rior to the magnificent human ability to reason.
Our culture’s entire value system is firmly based on the belief
that the rational principle is superior and, in fact, constitutes thehighest truth. The western scientific tradition has become our reli-gion. We are taught from a young age to try to be reasonable, log-ical, and consistent, to avoid emotional, irrational behavior, and tosuppress our feelings. At best, feelings and emotions are consideredfoolish, weak, and bothersome. At worst, we fear they may threat-en the very fabric of civilized society.
Our established religious institutions often support this fear of
the intuitive, nonrational self. Once based on a deep awareness ofthe universal spiritual principle in every being, many religions onlypay lip service to that idea now. Instead, they seek to control thebehavior of their devotees, using elaborate rule structures pur-ported to save people from their deep, irrational, and basically“sinful” natures. And according to many psychological disciplines,the dark and dangerous instinctual nature of man must be con-trolled. From this perspective, it is only the rational part of us thatis capable of harnessing this mysterious force and channeling it38 •Living in the LightLIL Quark-Part One  1/22/01  8:49 AM  Page 38into healthy, constructive modes.
In our worship of the rational and fear of the nonrational, we
deny not only our emotions and our instinctual energies such assexuality and aggression, but also our natural intuitive sense, whichis meant to be a primary guiding force in our lives.
Generally, less technically developed societies approach life
with a deep awareness of, and respect for, the intuitive element ofexistence. Every moment of their daily lives is guided by a strongsense of connection with the creative force. However, it is theirvery lack of technical development that has contributed to theirgradual destruction or subversion by modern civilization. Twoexamples relevant to most Americans are the Native American andAfrican cultures. Both of these groups were devastated by theircontact with European/American culture. However, a deep curios-ity, respect, and appreciation for Native Americans has begun tosurface in our awareness in recent years. And the African culture,forcibly brought to this continent, has probably done more thanany other culture to keep the intuitive power alive in our countrythrough its strong and soulful connection to spirit.
In human evolution, it seems that as our rational capacity has
evolved, we’ve grown increasingly fearful of the other aspects ofour natures. We’ve attempted to control these “dark forces” by cre-ating authoritative rule structures that define right and wrong,good and bad, and appropriate and inappropriate behavior in avery heavy-handed way. We justify this rigid approach to life byblaming everything on nonrational nature — from our personalemotional dramas to social ills such as drug and alcohol addiction,Intuition   •   39LIL Quark-Part One  1/22/01  8:49 AM  Page 39crime, violence, and war.
The truth is that all aspects of our being are integral, impor-
tant, and valuable parts of us. The more we distrust and suppressthese energies, the more likely they are to eventually burst out indistorted ways. In other words, our problems are not necessarilycaused by our emotional, nonrational nature running wild anduncontrolled; instead, both personal and social problems are morelikely to be the result of fear and the suppression of our emotions,instinctual nature, and intuition. In this book, we are focusing onhow we can reclaim the power of our intuitive sense.
Once we accept the reality of a higher power that is channeled
to us through our intuition, it becomes clear that many of our per-sonal problems and the ills of the world are actually caused by 
not
following our intuition.
Our rational mind is like a computer — it processes the input
it receives and calculates logical conclusions based on this infor-mation. The rational mind is finite; it can only compute the inputit has received directly. In other words, our rational minds can onlyoperate on the basis of the direct experience each of us has had inthis lifetime.
The intuitive mind, on the other hand, seems to have access to
an infinite supply of information. It appears to be able to tap intoa deep storehouse of knowledge and wisdom — the universalmind. It is also able to sort out this information and supply uswith exactly what we need, when we need it. Though the messagemay come through a bit at a time, if we learn to follow this sup-ply of information piece by piece, the necessary course of action40 •Living in the LightLIL Quark-Part One  1/22/01  8:49 AM  Page 40will be revealed. As we learn to rely on this guidance, life takes on
a flowing, effortless quality. Our life, feelings, and actions inter-weave harmoniously with those of others around us.
It is as if each of us played a unique instrument in a huge sym-
phony orchestra, conducted by a universal intelligence. If we playour part without regard for the conductor’s direction or the rest ofthe orchestra, we will have total chaos. If we try to take our cuesfrom those around us, rather than the conductor, it will be impos-sible to achieve harmony — there are too many people, all playingdifferent things. Our intellect is not able to process so much inputand decide on the best note to play at each moment. However, ifwe watch the conductor and follow his direction we can experiencethe joy of playing our unique part, which can be heard and appre-ciated by everyone, and at the same time experience ourselves aspart of a greater harmonious whole.
When we apply this analogy to our lives, we see that most of
us have never realized a conductor was present. We have lived thebest we can, using only our intellect to understand our lives, to fig-ure out the best course of action. If we are honest with ourselves,we will readily admit that we are not making great music under theguidance of our rational mind alone. The dissonance and chaos inour lives and in the world certainly reflects the impossibility of liv-ing this way.
By tuning into the intuition and allowing it to become the guid-
ing force in our lives, we allow our inner “conductor” to take itsrightful place as the leader of the orchestra. Rather than losing ourindividual freedom, we receive the support we need to effectivelyIntuition   •   41LIL Quark-Part One  1/22/01  8:49 AM  Page 41express our individuality. Moreover, we will enjoy the experience of
being part of a larger creative process.
I don’t fully understand how the intuition functions in such an
amazing way, but I definitely know, through direct experience andthrough observation and feedback from the many people I haveworked with, that it does. And I find that the more I trust and fol-low this inner intuitive “voice,” the easier, fuller, and more excitingmy life becomes.
Meditation
Sit or lie down in a comfortable position in a quiet place. Close
your eyes and relax. T ake several slow, deep breaths, relaxing yourbody more with each breath. Relax your mind and let yourthoughts drift, but don’t hold onto any thought. Imagine that yourmind becomes as quiet as a peaceful lake.
Now focus your conscious awareness into a deep place in your
body, in the area of your stomach or solar plexus. It should be theplace in your body where you feel that your “gut feelings” reside.This is the physical place where you can easily contact your intu-ition.
Imagine that you have a wise being living inside there. Y ou
might have an image of what this wise being looks like, or youmight just sense that it is there. This wise being is really a part ofyou — your intuitive self. Y ou can communicate with it by silently“talking” to it, making requests, or asking questions. Then relax,don’t think too hard with your rational mind, and be open to42 •Living in the LightLIL Quark-Part One  1/22/01  8:49 AM  Page 42receiving the answers. The answers are usually very simple, they
relate to the present moment (not the past or future), and they feel
right.
If you don’t receive an immediate answer, let go and go about
your life. The answer will come later, whether from inside of youin the form of a feeling or idea, or from outside through a person,a book, an event, or whatever.
For example, you might say, “Intuition, tell me what I need to
know here. What do I need to do in this situation?”
Trust the feeling that you get and 
act on it. If it is truly your
intuition, you will find that it leads to a feeling of greater alivenessand power, and more opportunities begin to open up for you. If itdoesn’t lead to these things, you may not have been truly actingfrom your intuition but from some other voice in you. Go backand ask for clarification.
It takes practice to hear and trust your intuition. The more you
do it, the easier it will become. Eventually you will be able to con-tact your intuition, ask yourself questions, and know that in thatwise being within you, an incredible source of power and strengthis available to answer your questions and guide you. As you growmore sensitive to this guidance you will gain a sense of knowingwhat you need to do in any situation. Y our intuitive power isalways available to guide you whenever you need it. It will open toyou as you become willing to trust yourself and your inner knowl-edge.Intuition   •   43LIL Quark-Part One  1/22/01  8:49 AM  Page 4344
Chapter Four
Becoming a Creative Channel
To whatever degree you listen to and follow your intuition, you
become a “creative channel” for the higher power of the universe.When you willingly follow where your creative energy leads, thehigher power can come through you to manifest its creative work.When this happens, you will find yourself flowing with the ener-gy, doing what you really want to do, and feeling the power of theuniverse moving through you to create or transform everythingaround you.
In using the word channel, I am 
not referring to the psychic
process of trance channeling. Trance channeling involves a medi-um who goes into a trance state and allows another being to speakLIL Quark-Part One  1/22/01  8:49 AM  Page 44through him or her. By channeling, I mean being in touch with and
bringing through the wisdom and creativity of your own deepest
source. Being a channel is being fully and freely yourself and con-sciously knowing that you are a vehicle for the creativity of the uni-verse.
Every creative genius has been a channel. Every masterwork has
been created through the channeling process. Great works are notcreated by the personality alone. They arise from a deep inspira-tion on the universal level, and are then expressed and brought intoform 
through the individual personality.
A person may have great technical skill, but without the abili-
ty to connect with a deeper source, his work will be uninspiring.The difference between a technician and a channel was clearlydemonstrated in the movie 
Amadeus. The composer Salieri knew
how to write music but he didn’t know how to tap into the creativesource. Mozart wrote music that was both technically perfect andwonderfully inspired, and he did so easily, spontaneously, withoutthought or effort. From his early childhood on, music just seemedto bubble up and overflow from within him. I’m sure he had noidea how it happened and could not have explained to anyone elsehow to do it.
Such genius has always seemed mysterious and unexplainable, a
God-given talent possessed by only a few. It seems to come and goat will — sometimes it’s there, sometimes it’s not. Because of this,many creative people fear their talent will suddenly disappear.They don’t know how they got it so they have no idea how torecover it if it vanishes.Becoming a Creative Channel   •   45LIL Quark-Part One  1/22/01  8:49 AM  Page 45Creative people often function as channels in only one area of
their lives (such as one of the arts, science, or business) and mayhave no idea how to do it in other areas of their lives. Thus, theirlives can be terribly out of balance. (See the section on HighlyIntuitive People in the chapter on Trusting Intuition.) This is onereason why we often equate genius with emotional instability.
I believe we are all geniuses — each in our own unique way. We
will discover the nature of our particular genius when we stop try-ing to conform to our own or other people’s models, learn to beourselves, and allow our natural channel to open. Through trust-ing and acting on our intuition, it’s possible to bring our naturalcreative inspiration into every moment, in every area of our lives.
When I speak of a channel, I have an image of a long round
pipe with energy flowing through it. It’s somewhat like the pipe ina pipe organ, with the music coming through.
This channel image has three important features:1. It is open and unobstructed inside so that the energy can
move through freely.
2. It has a definite physical form; a structure surrounds the
open space so that the energy is directed in a particular way.Without this structure, the energy would be free-floating, withoutany focus.
3. It has a power source — something that moves energy
through the channel.
In a pipe organ, the power source (the organ) sends energy
through the open pipes. The particular combination of open space46 •Living in the LightLIL Quark-Part One  1/22/01  8:49 AM  Page 46inside each pipe and the structure — the size and shape of the
pipe — causes a certain note to be sounded. The power source isthe same for all the pipes and the energy moving through them isthe same, but because each one is a different shape, each one makesa unique sound.
We can think of ourselves as channels similar to these pipes.
We have a common power source (the universal life force) and thesame creative energy flows through each of us. Our body and per-sonality form the structure that determines the unique directionand function of each of us as a channel. It is up to us to keep ourchannel open and clear and to build and maintain a strong, healthy,beautiful body/personality structure as a vehicle for our creativeenergy. We can do this by constantly tuning in, asking where theenergy wants to go, and moving with it.
A strong body/personality structure is not created by follow-
ing anybody else’s rules or good ideas about what you should eat,how you should exercise, or anything else.
It is created primarily by
trusting your intuition and learning to follow its direction .When
deciding what to eat, how to exercise, or anything else, gather infor-mation from reliable sources, then check in with yourself to seewhat feels intuitively right for you, and do your best to follow yourown inner guidance.
Most of us have had occasional experiences of trusting our
intuition and having things work out in amazing ways. The fol-lowing true story is a good example of this. A few years ago, myeditor, Becky, had achieved what many people think of as the“American dream.” She had a husband and daughter, a good job,Becoming a Creative Channel   •   47LIL Quark-Part One  1/22/01  8:49 AM  Page 47money in the bank, and owned her own home. Y et she felt an
emptiness inside.
She felt an inner prompting to leave her job and pursue a career
in publishing. Her husband did not support this idea. In fact, hepointed out that she didn’t have the “formal education necessary”to obtain a position in a publishing house.
Becky and her husband eventually separated, and she decided
to make a move. She had been reading many books, including
Living in the Light, and knew that she wanted to work for a pub-
lisher in the field of personal growth. Her intuitive feeling was thatshe needed to move to Northern California.
It was the most difficult and couragious step she had ever taken.
She found herself in a new community with no friends, no job, andno money. She had no luck, at first, obtaining a publishing job, andso she looked for any kind of work that would enable her to sur-vive. Many times she questioned her choice to take such a risk, yetshe kept feeling a deep sense that she was on the right track.
Finally, she found work in another field. She was able to get
back on her feet financially and she regained her confidence. Shecontinued her search for a publishing job, and this time she wassuccessful. She happily took a cut in pay and position to take anentry-level job at New World Library — the company she hadalways hoped to work for. Finally, she felt, she was at home. As ofthis writing, Becky has been with New World Library for six years.She has her dream job as the editorial director.
By following her inner guidance, even through very difficult
times, she found the perfect place to express her creativity and48 •Living in the LightLIL Quark-Part One  1/22/01  8:49 AM  Page 48make her contribution to the world.
Y ou may have had a similar experience, where listening to your
intuition about something proved so fruitful and fulfilling. Ifso, the next step is to become more conscious of the process so you can recognize when you are following the flow of energy, asopposed to blocking, fighting, or trying to control it. The morewilling you are to surrender to the energy within you, the morepower can flow through you.
I know most of us have had experiences at certain times when
we’ve felt life energy, wisdom, and power flow through us, when wehave felt momentarily “enlightened.” We have a brief moment ofclarity and power and then it goes away again. When it goes away,we feel lost and unsure of ourselves.
The more you practice trusting and following your intuition,
the more consistently you will feel that sense of “flow.” At thesetimes you may find yourself right where you want to be at everymoment. Y ou’ll be where the energy is the greatest for you, doingwhat you want to do, and watching miracles being accomplished.Y our energy may have a transformational effect on others, as well.
As you strengthen the commitment to trusting yourself, every-
thing in your life may change. At first, as you begin to let go ofyour old patterns, it may appear that things in your life are fallingapart. Y ou may find that you have to let go of certain things you’vebeen attached to. Some relationships in your life may dissolve orsimply “fizzle out” from lack of energy. Old pastimes may nolonger interest you. Y ou may even lose your job or decide to leaveit.Becoming a Creative Channel   •   49LIL Quark-Part One  1/22/01  8:49 AM  Page 49Of course, these changes can be upsetting and frightening.
Over time, however, you will find that this is all part of the transformation you are going through. As you learn to be true toyourself, you will find that you attract people, work, and other cir-cumstances that reflect your evolution and development.
Maintaining Y our Focus
In order to live fully and creatively, it’s important to stay
focused on following your own energy. This focus allows yourchannel to remain open to the energy flowing through. It’s so easyto lose your focus, to get lost in other people, external goals, anddesires. And the problem is, we do exactly that: we lose our con-nection with ourselves. As long as we are overly focused on the out-side there will always be an empty, hungry, lost place inside thatneeds to be filled.
If I’m in love with someone and begin to think of him as my
source of joy, then I lose myself. I have to remind myself that thesource of joy and love is already within me, that I am experiencinglove externally only because it is inside me. I try to keep the focuson the universe within and at the same time feel the universe com-ing through my lover to me.
For me, it’s a constant discipline to remember to go back
inside to connect with my intuition. I’ll remind myself regularlyduring the day to do this. If I find myself getting lost in my outeractivities, I’ll check back inside to see if I’m being true to my feel-ings. This keeps the flow of the universe moving through me.50 •Living in the LightLIL Quark-Part One  1/22/01  8:49 AM  Page 50As we learn to pay attention to our intuitive feelings, follow
our own energy and live our truth, we find that we feel more andmore of the life force moving through us. That feeling of greateraliveness is so wonderful that it becomes our major focus andsource of fulfillment.
We feel less attached to the externals of our lives. Whether or
not things go as we have planned seems less important when wefeel that our satisfaction is coming primarily from sustaining ourconnection to our own life energy. Ironically, when we stay true toourselves in this way, the externals of our lives reflect our innerintegrity. We attract to us and create around us exactly what ourhearts and souls truly desire.
Living as a Channel
Channeling works in two ways: energy either flows through
you to others, or from others to you. For example, as I write mybook, I focus on the energy flowing from the universe through meto others. Then, when people say to me, “I just love your books;they’ve changed my life,” I am conscious of appreciation comingfrom them to me, and through me, back to the universal source.
As you become increasingly conscious of the flow of life mov-
ing through you and through everything and everyone else, yourbody will become capable of channeling more energy. The moreenergy you are willing to receive, the more you’ll be able to give.
T o become a clear channel for the universe presents the high-
est challenge and offers the greatest potential joy and fulfillmentBecoming a Creative Channel   •   51LIL Quark-Part One  1/22/01  8:49 AM  Page 51for every human being. Being a channel means living fully and 
passionately in the world, having deep relationships, playing, work-ing, creating, enjoying money and material possessions, being your-self, yet maintaining your profound connection with the power ofthe universe within you, learning and growing from every experi-ence that you have.
Then you can watch the universe create through you; it can use
you to do its work. Living as a channel is an ongoing learningprocess that’s available to anyone who is willing to make the innercommitment.
Group Channeling
As we develop the ability to trust and follow our intuition, we
learn to open and strengthen our individual channel so we canbring more power, creativity, and love through us. When we cometogether in a relationship or in a group, each individual channelbecomes part of a bigger channel. A group channel is created thatis more powerful than any of us can be individually.
When many bodies and minds are willing to surrender, open
up, and grow, these combined energies create a very strong, openstructure that allows a lot more energy to come through from theuniverse. The process intensifies tremendously and everyone gets apowerful “boost” from the energy, which is capable of pushingeach of us to the next level of our growth. Even though we may allbe in somewhat different places and going through differentthings, each person receives the inspiration, the support, the push,52 •Living in the LightLIL Quark-Part One  1/22/01  8:49 AM  Page 52or whatever is needed to enable them to take the next step on their
journey. A group channel can open us up to a deeper level ofawareness, and in the process, we share more of ourselves and findthat we are healed of things that have held us back.
This is one reason I love teaching workshops and working with
groups. My friends call me an “energy junkie” because I’m alwaysattracted to situations where the energy is most intense and expan-sive. I love the way my personal growth process is accelerated bythe intensification that happens in groups.
I have found that in leading a group, I usually need to start
with a certain amount of structure and take responsibility to clear-ly maintain the leader position. As the group continues, I can letgo of the structure more and more and gradually allow the spon-taneous energy of the group to take over.
As everyone surrenders and opens up, the group channel is
formed. This process can be confusing and chaotic at timesbecause, as the leader, I am no longer “in control” in the usual senseof the word. It can arouse my fears and everyone else’s, but I findthat when I’m willing to move through the fears, something power-ful and beautiful emerges through the group channel. The universeleads us into new places and new discoveries that we would not havehad an opportunity to experience if we had stayed within a moreformal structure. I find the process of group channeling very excit-ing and rewarding.
In a sense, everyone living on this planet is a part of a gigantic
group channel — the mass consciousness of humanity. This world,as it is now, is the creation of the group channel. As each one of us,Becoming a Creative Channel   •   53LIL Quark-Part One  1/22/01  8:49 AM  Page 53individually, surrenders to the power of the universe and allows that
power to transform and enlighten us, the group channel is affectedaccordingly. The mass consciousness becomes more and moreevolved. This is how I see our world being transformed.
Meditation
Sit or lie down in a comfortable position. Close your eyes. T ake
a deep breath and relax your body. T ake another deep breath andrelax your mind. Continue to breathe slowly and deeply and let goof all tension or anxiety. As you relax, you find yourself in a deep,quiet place inside. Allow yourself to just rest in that place for a fewmoments, with nothing you need to do or think about.
From this deep, quiet place, begin to sense the life force with-
in you. Imagine that you are following your own energy, feeling it,trusting it, moving with it in every moment of your life. Y ou arebeing completely true to yourself, speaking and living your truth.Y ou feel alive and empowered. Imagine that you are expressing yourcreativity fully and freely, and let yourself enjoy that experience. Bybeing who you are and expressing yourself, you are having a heal-ing and empowering effect on everyone you encounter and on theworld around you.54 •Living in the LightLIL Quark-Part One  1/22/01  8:49 AM  Page 54Chapter Five
Exploring Our Many Selves
W e are all born with an infinite number of different qualities
or energies within us. One of our most important tasks in life isto discover and develop as many of these energies as possible, sothat we can be well-rounded, and experience the full range of ourpotential.
We can think of these energies as different archetypes, subper-
sonalities, or selves within us. In a way, it’s as if there are many dif-ferent characters living inside of us, each with its own task andpurpose.
Since the physical world is a plane of duality, for each of
these energies within us, there is an opposite energy. In order toexperience wholeness and balance, we need to develop and inte-
55LIL Quark-Part One  1/22/01  8:49 AM  Page 5556 •Living in the Light
grate both sides of every polarity.
Most of us, however, are not accustomed to thinking in this
way. We have been taught to think in a linear, exclusive fashion —good/bad, right/wrong. So if one quality is good or desirable, itsopposite is bad, or undesirable.
For example, many of us have been taught that it is virtuous
and admirable to give to others; a person who gives a lot is a goodperson. Therefore, taking is thought to be selfish; a person whotakes a lot for himself might be judged as less worthy than a giv-ing person.
Someone else with different values might think of this in an
opposite way. He might admire a person who knows how to takea lot for himself and think of that person as smart and successful,while looking down on someone who is less aggressive and moregiving as being foolish and easily taken advantage of.
Either way, one polarity is honored while the opposite is deval-
ued. In reality, both giving and receiving are equally important andvaluable. If we give too much and aren’t able to take or receiveequally, we become depleted and resentful. If we take too muchand are unable to give, we lose the satisfaction of making a contri-bution, and incur the resentment of others. If we can give andreceive more or less in balance, we experience a healthy sense ofsatisfaction.
From the time we are born, we begin to experiment with
expressing the different energies within us. At that time we arecompletely dependent on our parents or caretakers for our survivaland well-being, so we are extremely sensitive to their reactions toLIL Quark-Part One  1/22/01  8:49 AM  Page 56us. If we express an energy that invokes approval and positive
attention, we are likely to continue to develop that quality. On theother hand, if something we do draws disapproval, criticism, orpunishment, we are likely to discontinue it (unless that is the onlyform of attention we can get, in which case we may continue it).
Fairly soon, we have a pretty good sense of which energies help
us get our needs met and which ones seem to cause us more prob-lems than they are worth. This varies greatly according to eachindividual, family system, time period, and culture.
As we grow up, we continue to develop the energies that seem
to work best to meet our needs. We become very identified withthese qualities; that’s who we think we are. These dominant ener-gies become our 
primary selves — the inner characters whose job
it is to take care of us and make our lives work as well as possible.
There are usually a group of primary selves who work togeth-
er as a team, making most of our decisions for us. For example,some of my primary selves are the super-responsible one, thepleaser (who wants to make everyone happy so they will like me),the pusher (who wants me to work hard and accomplish a lot), thecaretaking mother (who takes care of the child in other people sothat they’ll feel good with me), the consciousness teacher/healer.There are a number of others on the team as well. They have allworked very hard to make me a worthy, well-loved, and successfulperson.
For every primary self, there is an opposite energy, which
oftentimes has been repressed or denied because one way or anoth-er we got the message that it was not okay, or because it simply has-Exploring Our Many Selves   •   57LIL Quark-Part One  1/22/01  8:49 AM  Page 57n’t had space to develop. These energies become our disowned
selves. They are usually buried within our psyche and we either
don’t know about them at all, or we are aware of them and try tohide them from the world. The disowned selves make up our shad-ow side, the parts of ourselves that we are embarrassed about,ashamed of, fearful of, or uncomfortable with. Our primary selvesare usually working hard to make sure that we don’t show these dis-owned selves to the world, since they are convinced that this wouldinvite criticism, rejection, abandonment, or some form of disaster.
The problem is that each of these disowned selves carries an
essential energy that is an important part of us. In fact, we areoften in desperate need of these qualities in order to bring healingand balance into our lives. As long as we fear our shadow side,however, we can’t access the energies that we need.
For example, if one of your primary selves is 
power, and you
are very identified with being strong, competent, and independent,it is very likely that you have disowned your vulnerable side, thepart of you that feels dependent on others and has needs for loveand support. From the point of view of your power primary self,your vulnerable side might seem disgusting, and way too danger-ous to show to the world for fear of being hurt. Y ou might becompletely unconscious of having a vulnerable side, or you mightbe aware of it but not want others to see it for fear of their judg-ment. Strangely, you will find that you are constantly attractingvulnerable people into your life, and you may at times feel veryjudgmental toward them for being so “weak.”
Believe it or not, you need to consciously accept and “own”
your vulnerable side. Without it, you cannot have real intimacy and58 •Living in the LightLIL Quark-Part One  1/22/01  8:49 AM  Page 58closeness with others, and you can’t really receive. Y ou are out of
touch with a very important part of your human experience.
Life has an amazing way of confronting us with, and reflect-
ing to us, the exact energies that we need to discover within our-selves and integrate into our lives. This happens through ourdreams, where we are often shown symbolically the relationshipsbetween our primary selves and disowned selves. It happens con-stantly in our relationships, where others reflect to us the variousdifferent selves within us. Our imbalances show up in every area ofour lives from our health to our finances.
How do we become conscious of the many selves within and
bring them into balance in our lives?
The first and most important step is to begin to recognize and
become aware of our primary selves. What qualities and energiesare you most identified with? Can you begin to notice the selveswithin you that automatically make most of your decisions andrun your life?
We want to honor and appreciate our primary selves for how
much they’ve done for us, while separating a bit from being total-ly identified with them. As soon as we become conscious of themas
energies within us rather than w h ow ea r e , we are beginning to
develop what is called “aware ego.”* Aware ego is the ability torecognize and hold all the different selves within us, so that weExploring Our Many Selves   •   59
*The ideas and terminology in this chapter, including the concepts of primary selves,
disowned selves, and aware ego are derived from the work of Drs. Hal and Sidra Stone— the Psychology of Selves and the V oice Dialogue technique. For more informationof their work, I highly recommend their books and tapes, listed in RecommendedResources.LIL Quark-Part One  1/22/01  8:49 AM  Page 59can have conscious choice about which ones we bring through at
any given moment.
Once we have some awareness in relation to our primary selves,
the disowned selves start to come forth. The primary selves usual-ly remain our strongest qualities, but we begin to feel more balancedand our lives begin to work better as we begin to integrate the ener-gy from previously disowned selves. The disidentification with theprimary selves, the development of aware ego, and the acknowledg-ing of the disowned selves is a gradual process that happens over alifetime. Every step we take in this process, however, can make a bigdifference in our lives.
Our intuitive wisdom is one of the energies or selves within us.
If we were encouraged to trust our intuition at an early age, or hadan intuitive parent figure as an early role model, our intuition maybe a primary self. Since our culture tends to deny or devalue theintuitive function, however, for must of us it is a disowned or rel-atively underdeveloped self, while rationality is usually one of theprimary selves.
If rationality is a primary self, and intuition is disowned, in
order to get in touch with our inner guidance, we may need to sep-arate from over-identification with our rational side. We do this byrecognizing it as 
one aspect of who we are, and beginning to notice
how it operates in our lives. Once we become more aware of it inthis way, we are no longer so identified with it and we can begin tohave more conscious choice about how and when we use it. Thiscreates space to explore our intuitive side as well.
If intuition is a primary self, we may have difficulty thinking
logically or dealing with practical matters in a grounded way. In60 •Living in the LightLIL Quark-Part One  1/22/01  8:49 AM  Page 60this case, we may need to develop our rational, practical side in
order to ground our intuition in the physical world.
Owning Our Shadow Side
There is a simple universal principle: Everything in the universe
wants to be accepted. All aspects of creation want to be loved,appreciated, and included. So, any quality or energy that you arenot allowing yourself to experience or express will keep coming upinside of you or around you until you recognize it as a part of you,until you accept it and integrate it into your personality and yourlife.
Many people who are involved in personal growth become very
identified with the energies and qualities that they think of as being“spiritual” — peaceful, loving, giving, and so on. In attempting todevelop these aspects of themselves, they often deny and disownother aspects that they consider to be “unspiritual” — aggression,assertiveness, gut-level honesty, human vulnerability.Unfortunately, this simply creates a huge shadow side within them,which contributes to the collective shadow of denied energies inour world.
For some, it can be quite shocking to realize that if we over-
identify with peace and love, and disown our inner warrior, we arenot contributing to world peace. Quite the opposite, in fact. If wedon’t own our inner warrior and channel him in a constructive wayin our lives, he retreats into the shadows of our individual and col-lective psyche, and actually contributes to the perpetuation of waron our planet.Exploring Our Many Selves   •   61LIL Quark-Part One  1/22/01  8:49 AM  Page 61If we truly want inner peace and world peace, we must do the
difficult but fascinating work of owning and appreciating allaspects of who we are — truly making peace with ourselves. Realconsciousness involves holding both sides of any polarity, notidentifying with one. Exploring and embracing our darkness is theonly way we can truly live in the light.
Meditation
Get in a comforable position in a quiet place. Bring to mind
one of your main personality characteristics or primary selves. Geta sense in your body of how that energy feels. Now imagine anopposite energy, which may be disowned or less developed in you.Imagine what that energy would feel like. What would be the pos-itive benefits of developing more ability to contact that energy?How could that bring more balance into your life? 
See if you can feel a balance of both of those energies at the
same time. For example, if you are an outgoing person, you mightbalance that with a quieter, more introspective energy. If you arehardworking, you might balance that with the energy of relaxationor playfulness.62 •Living in the LightLIL Quark-Part One  1/22/01  8:49 AM  Page 62Chapter Six
The W orld as Our Mirror
T he physical world is our creation: we each create our own ver-
sion of the world, our particular reality, our unique life experience.Because I am creating my life, I can look at my creation to get feed-back about myself. Just as an artist looks at his latest creation tosee what works well and what doesn’t, and thereby improves hisskills, we can look at the ongoing masterwork of our lives toappreciate who we are and to recognize what we still need to learn.
We’re creating our lives as we go along; therefore, our experi-
ences give us an instant, ongoing reflection of ourselves. In fact, theexternal world is like a giant mirror that reflects our consciousnessclearly and accurately. Once we have learned how to look into that
63LIL Quark-Part One  1/22/01  8:49 AM  Page 63mirror and perceive and interpret its reflection, we have a fabulous
tool for self-awareness.
Understanding that the world is our mirror can help us see our
lives as a reflection of our beliefs, attitudes, and emotional pat-terns. Viewed in this way, the external world can teach us abouthidden aspects of ourselves that we can’t see directly. The processis based on two premises:
1. I assume that 
everything in my life is my reflection, my cre-
ation; there are no accidents or events that are unrelated to me. IfI see or feel something, if it has any impact on me, then my soulhas attracted or created it to show me something. If it didn’t mir-ror some part of myself, I wouldn’t even be able to see it. All thepeople in my life are reflections of the various characters and ener-gies that live inside of me.
2. I always try to avoid putting myself down for the reflections
I see. I know that nothing is negative. Everything is a gift thatbrings me to self-awareness — after all, I’m here to learn. If I wasalready perfect I wouldn’t be here. Why should I get angry atmyself when I see things I’ve been unconscious of ? It would be likea first grader getting frustrated because she wasn’t in college yet. Itry to maintain a compassionate attitude toward myself and mylearning process. T o the extent that I can do this, the learningprocess becomes fun and really quite interesting.
I am learning to view my life as a fascinating and adventurous
movie. All the characters in it are parts of me played out on the bigscreen so that I can clearly see them. Once I see them and recognize64 •Living in the LightLIL Quark-Part One  1/22/01  8:49 AM  Page 64their various feelings and voices inside myself, I can understand
that they are all important and valuable parts of me that I need formy full expression in this life.
If the movie portrays problems, hassles, or struggles, I know I
must check inside to find out where I’m not being true to myselfor have more learning and healing to do. I also know that when I’mtrusting and being myself as fully as possible, everything in my lifereflects this by falling into place easily and working smoothly.
Problems Are Messages
If there are problems in your life, the universe is trying to get
your attention. It’s saying, “Hey, there’s something you need to beaware of, something that needs to be changed here!” If you payattention to the small signals, you will learn from them, but if youdon’t, the problems will intensify until you get the message andstart to pay attention. If you accept that every time a problemoccurs the universe is showing you something, you will make rapidprogress on your journey of self-discovery.
When something “negative” happens, it’s tempting to say,
“Why does this happen to me? I’m doing the best I can but noth-ing seems to be going right. I can’t understand why I keep havingthis problem.” If you find yourself doing this, try to open up toanother way of looking at things. Go inside and say to the universe,“I know you’re trying to show me something. Help me understandwhat it is.”
After you do this, let go of focusing on it, and go about yourThe World as Our Mirror   •   65LIL Quark-Part One  1/22/01  8:49 AM  Page 65life, but stay open to the message that will be coming through. It
may come in the form of an inner feeling or awareness, somewords from a friend, or something unexpected that happens toyou. The message may come through immediately or it may takequite a while. One of my clients was fired, quite unexpectedly, overtwo years ago. At first, he was devastated, but after a few monthsof “getting his bearings,” he went into business on his own. Hisbusiness is now doing very well, but it was only a few weeks agothat he understood the message that his firing reflected. As he wastalking to a friend about working for other people, he suddenlyrealized that the firing incident was trying to tell him that he wasready to be in business for himself, rather than working for otherpeople. For him, this realization not only affirmed his presentcourse in life, but it also finally resolved the sense of failure aboutbeing fired that had lingered with him since the incident.
Interpreting the Reflection
The trickiest part of using the mirror process is learning how
to interpret the reflection you see. Once you do get a message, butyou’re not quite sure what it is, how do you find out?
It will not help to over-analyze or obsess about it with your
rational mind. It is far more effective to turn to your intuitive self,to ask the universe for help. Simply sit quietly, take a few deepbreaths, and focus your awareness within — to the wise part ofyou that is in touch with the wisdom of the universe. Ask this part,either silently or out loud, for guidance or help in understanding66 •Living in the LightLIL Quark-Part One  1/22/01  8:49 AM  Page 66the message. As you tune into your gut feelings and get a sense of
what feels right in the moment, act on this feeling.
After acting on the feeling, try to be aware of the external and
internal feedback from your actions. The external feedback is howwell things work. Do things seem to fall into place and work easi-ly? Then you’re surely in tune with your inner guidance. If you’restruggling to do something that doesn’t happen easily, it’s a mes-sage to let go and check back in to find out what you really wantto be doing.
Internal feedback will come to you as feelings. If you feel
empowered, more alive, then it’s right. The ultimate key is 
aliveness.
The more the universe moves through you, the more alive you feel.Conversely, every time you don’t follow your inner guidance youfeel a loss of energy, loss of power, a sense of spiritual or emo-tional deadness.
In being true to yourself you will feel more alive, but you may
also feel uncomfortable. This is because you are risking change! Asyou undergo certain changes, you may experience various intenseemotions such as fear, grief, or anger. Allow these emotions expres-sion; after all, your inner guidance has to move through years ofaccumulated unconsciousness, denial, doubt, and fear. So let yourfeelings come up and wash through you — you are being cleanedout and healed.
At times like this, it is very important to have emotional 
support and a safe place to explore your feelings and do your heal-ing process. If possible, I recommend finding a good therapist orsupport group — an environment where you are encouraged andThe World as Our Mirror   •   67LIL Quark-Part One  1/22/01  8:49 AM  Page 6768 •Living in the Light
supported in experiencing your own feelings and needs, expressing
yourself honestly, and trusting your own sense of what’s right foryou.
When you are growing and changing rapidly, your inner
doubts and fears will often be reflected in the reactions of thosearound you. If your friends and family question or judge thechanges in you, recognize that they are simply mirroring the doubt-ing, fearful voices in you, such as, “What if I’m doing the wrongthing? Can I really trust this process?”
Respond to such feedback from others in whatever way you
feel is appropriate: reassure them, ignore them, argue with them,whatever. The important thing is to recognize that you are 
really
dealing with your own inner fears. The conflicts you may experi-ence with others are mirroring the conflicts within yourself,between the parts of you that want to grow and change, and thosethat feel safer to do things the way you’ve always done them.Affirm that you are learning to trust yourself more and more. Y ouwill be amazed to see how frequently others will begin to mirroryour increasing self-trust and confidence by responding to youwith trust and confidence.
Here are some ways that the mirror of life reflects us:If you judge and criticize yourself, others will judge and
criticize you.
If you hurt yourself, others will hurt you.If you lie to yourself, others will lie to you.If you are irresponsible to yourself, others will be LIL Quark-Part One  1/22/01  8:49 AM  Page 68irresponsible in relation to you.
If you blame yourself, others will blame you.If you do violence to yourself emotionally, others will do 
violence to you emotionally, or even physically.
If you don’t listen to your feelings, no one will listen to 
your feelings.
If you love yourself, others will love you.If you respect yourself, others will respect you.If you trust yourself, others will trust you.If you are honest with yourself, others will be honest 
with you.
If you are gentle and compassionate with yourself, others will
treat you with compassion.
If you appreciate yourself, others will appreciate you.If you honor yourself, others will honor you.If you enjoy yourself, others will enjoy you.
Changing Old Patterns
It’s very important to realize that you may not be able to
change your old patterns overnight. Sometimes things seem tochange rapidly, once you’ve recognized the message, but sometimesit seems like you keep doing the same thing and getting the sameunpleasant results long after you feel you know better. It takes timefor the personality to change its habits, so you may have to watchthe same old movie repeat itself a few more times.
If you feel your progress is too slow, ask the universe for help,The World as Our Mirror   •   69LIL Quark-Part One  1/22/01  8:49 AM  Page 69and reach out for human help as well, by finding a therapist or sup-
port group. Change happens not by trying to make yourself change
but by becoming conscious of what’s not working. Y ou can then
ask your higher self for help in releasing the old and bringing inthe new pattern. Remember, the darkest hour is just before thedawn — change often occurs just when you’ve given up, or whenyou least expect it.
Using the Mirror Process
In using the world as your mirror, you must deal with the
external realities of your life in whatever way you need to handlethem. But as soon as possible, before, during, or after you deal withthe externals, check inside to find out what is being shown to you.
For example, if someone is angry at you and blames or criti-
cizes you, you may need to say to them, “Stop blaming me. I don’twant to hear your judgments and criticisms of me. If you can talkabout your own
feelings, I’ll be glad to listen, but if you keep
attacking me, I’m going to leave.” If they take more responsibilityfor their feelings (for example, “I felt hurt and angry when youdidn’t call me yesterday”), then you will probably be able to con-tinue the conversation on a more productive level. If they contin-ue to blame you and focus on your faults, you may need tosupport yourself by walking out of the room and refusing to con-tinue the conversation until they stop their attack.
Either way, you have handled the
external situation. Now, as
soon as you get a chance, check inside yourself and ask, “I wonderwhat this person’s anger is mirroring in me?” Y ou may realize that70 •Living in the LightLIL Quark-Part One  1/22/01  8:49 AM  Page 70you have been feeling very angry and critical toward yourself late-
ly. Or perhaps you will discover that a part of you is upset becauseyou haven’t been paying enough attention to yourself.
When other
people want more from you, it’s usually an indication that you wantmore from yourself.
It may in fact be a signal that it’s time to show
up and be more present with your own needs and feelings.
Interestingly, other people in our lives often start feeling betterwhen we become more present with 
ourselves.
A friend of mine discovered that her boyfriend had been see-
ing another woman and lying to her about it. She was very hurt andangry, particularly to discover the dishonesty. They had a long talkin which she was able to express her feelings to him. Then she tooksome time alone for a while to sort things out on her own.
When she was alone, she asked herself, “Is there some way I’m
lying to myself, some way I’m not being totally truthful and honestwith myself, that would cause me to attract a dishonest man?” Shelet go of thinking about it and went to work. By the end of the dayshe realized she had often felt this man was not fully present withher, was not being real with her. But in the past, she had denied andcovered up these feelings because she was afraid to confront himwith what she felt and intuitively knew. Thus, she effectively lied toherself and supported him in his deceptions as well.
She realized this was a lesson in learning to trust her feelings
more and to have the courage to express and support them. Shestarted to do this more with her boyfriend, and they eventuallyworked out a more honest, communicative relationship. She mightalso have chosen not to continue the relationship. What mattersis that she received the gift from it — learning to trust andThe World as Our Mirror   •   71LIL Quark-Part One  1/22/01  8:49 AM  Page 7172 •Living in the Light
express her feelings.
If you are emotionally triggered by something a person does,
the two of you are probably mirrors for each other. It may appearthat you have opposing viewpoints, but internally you are probablysimilar. One of you is acting out one side of the internal conflict,while the other plays out the other side.
For example, one person may want more commitment in a
relationship, while the other wants more freedom. They becomeextremely polarized on this issue and truly believe they want oppo-site things. However, if one person suddenly switches her position(the one who wanted commitment suddenly wants freedom), theother person often swings to the opposite polarity. The reason forthis is that they are attempting to resolve an inner conflict they
bothhave — the desire for closeness and security and the need for
independence and autonomy (which may feel like the fear of lone-liness versus the fear of entrapment).
Once people look inside and become more aware of their feel-
ings, they often recognize that they have simply projected theirinner conflict onto the outside world so that they could recognizeand deal with it. If a person truly and unequivocally wants a com-mitted relationship, he will simply attract another person whowants the same thing. If someone feels completely clear aboutwanting to explore being with many partners, he simply does it. Byusing the mirror process, you can recognize what you really feeland learn to be more honest with yourself. Once you recognize aninternal conflict, you can acknowledge that both polarities are real-ly within you and find ways to honor both of the energies. ForLIL Quark-Part One  1/22/01  8:49 AM  Page 72example, we all contain the polarities of desiring closeness in rela-
tionships while also desiring independence and autonomy. As con-scious beings, we must learn to satisfy 
both these needs. By
honoring both of these energies within us, we can learn to createrelationships in which we have both closeness and independence.
Seeing the world as your mirror also gives you wonderful
opportunities to receive positive feedback. Think of everythingthat you like and enjoy about your life right now. Y ou created thesethings — they are also your mirrors. Think of the people youknow whom you love, enjoy, respect, and admire. They are yourmirrors. They couldn’t even be in your life if they didn’t reflectyou: you would not be able to recognize their positive qualities ifyou didn’t have similar ones. Think of the people and animals thatlove you. They are a mirror of how you love yourself. If you havea home that you love, or a particular spot in nature that is verybeautiful to you, it is a mirror of your own beauty. When you seebeauty anywhere, it’s a reflection of yourself.
There are mirrors everywhere. Whoever you have a connection
with is a mirror for you, and the deeper the connection, thestronger the mirror. Part of the fascination in using the mirrorprocess is discovering who we are through these external reflec-tions. The key is to always go back inside to discover the meaningof the reflection for you. The more you are willing to do thatwithout either rationalizing away what you see or blaming yourselffor it, the faster you can develop and express the multifacetedpotential within you.The World as Our Mirror   •   73LIL Quark-Part One  1/22/01  8:49 AM  Page 7374 •Living in the Light
Meditation
Relax and close your eyes. T ake a few deep, slow breaths and
move into a deep place inside of you. Bring to your mind animportant person or thing in your life and ask him/her/it what itis mirroring to you. Stay open to receiving the answer, whether itcomes in words, feelings, or images. It may come immediately orsome time later.
Exercises
1. Think of a person you especially love and admire. List all
their positive qualities. Think about how those qualities mirroryou. In some cases, they may be qualities you have not fully devel-oped in yourself. Recognize that this person is here to teach andinspire you by his or her example.
2. Make a list of the things and people in your life that you
especially like. Praise and appreciate yourself for creating andattracting these mirrors.
3. Think of someone whom you judge or feel uncomfortable
with. Try to figure out exactly what quality they have that you dis-like. Is it possible that this is a quality within yourself that youdeny or judge, and that your life could be enhanced if you madepeace with, and were able to express, that part of yourself ?
For example:If you dislike someone who appears very selfish, they may be
reflecting the disowned part of you that wants you to pay moreattention to taking care of your own needs. Perhaps you are over-ly identified with taking care of others.LIL Quark-Part One  1/22/01  8:49 AM  Page 7475
Chapter Seven
Spirit and Form
Spirit is the essence of life, the energy of the universe that cre-
ates all things. Each one of us is a part of that spirit — a divineentity. So the spirit is the higher self, the eternal being that liveswithin us.
Form is the physical world. As an individual, my form is my
physical body and my personality, which includes my mind andmy emotions. It is also my self-concept — my ego/identity struc-ture: “My name is Shakti Gawain. I was born on September 30,1948. I’m 5’9” tall. I’m intelligent and have a generally outgoingpersonality.” This is all information about my form.
We, as spiritual beings, created the physical world as a place toLIL Quark-Part One  1/22/01  8:49 AM  Page 75learn. It’s our school, our playground, our artist’s studio. I believe
that we’re here to master the process of creation and to learn howto integrate all levels of our being — spiritual, mental, emotional,and physical — so that we can live in the physical world in balanceand wholeness.
Physicists are now discovering what metaphysicians have
claimed for thousands of years: seemingly solid physical matter is,in reality, made of energy. If we look through a powerful micro-scope at anything “solid,” we see an infinite number of littlevibrating particles. If we closely examine one of these particles, wediscover that it is made of even smaller particles, and so on. Thefact is that everything physical is made of “energy” — which wecan also call “life force,” or “spirit.” So modern science supportsthe ancient metaphysical truth that form is created out of spirit.
When our spirit decides to manifest as physical form, the first
thing it creates is a physical body in which to house itself. Wechoose a life situation and create a body in accordance with whatwe feel will best serve and teach us in this lifetime. Ultimately, ourgoal is to create a body/personality that can fully express our divinecreative spirit, a form that can do everything our spirit wants to doeasily, skillfully, and beautifully.
However, our physical form (body/personality) has an impor-
tant job of its own to do. Its main responsibility is to make surethat we survive physically, and once that is assured, that we actual-ly 
thrive physically and emotionally in this life. So our forms have
a certain consciousness that revolves around making sure we getenough food and shelter, protecting ourselves from danger, gaining76 •Living in the LightLIL Quark-Part One  1/22/01  8:49 AM  Page 76a sense of security by making sure reproduction takes place and
offspring survive, creating family and community in which we cangive and receive the emotional nurturing we need, and finding asense of belonging.
The energy of our spirit is very different from that of our
form. Our spirit has a very expanded vision and perspective, butvery little understanding of what it means to be in a human form.Our form carries our human experience, with all its limitations andvulnerabilities, and also with the knowledge of how to live in thephysical world.
After we are born into the body, most of us forget who we are
on the spiritual level and why we came here. We take on the “sur-vival” consciousness of the physical world and we get lost in theworld of form. We forget that we are souls, believing we are justour personalities. We lose touch with our source of power and feellost and helpless. Life becomes a tremendous struggle to findmeaning and satisfaction.
We may spend many lifetimes caught up in this cycle. Certainly,
most of us have spent many years in this lifetime looking out-side ourselves, trying to find fulfillment in the world of form.Eventually we realize that it’s not working: no matter what wedo in the world, we don’t find profound happiness. We becomeunwilling to spend one more lifetime, one more year, or even onemore minute in futile struggle. In frustration and hopelessness, wegive up.
This is usually a painful and frightening place in a person’s life
— it feels like hitting bottom. It is a kind of death of our oldSpirit and Form   •   77LIL Quark-Part One  1/22/01  8:49 AM  Page 77identity when the form recognizes the hopelessness of trying to
live this way and surrenders its fight. It would rather die than keeptrying. At this time a person often has thoughts and feelings ofdeath, or may experience the death of a close friend or familymember (or several of them). Some people create a serious illness,accident, or other major crisis at this time, and some contemplateor even attempt suicide.
But the darkest hour is truly just before the dawn. When we
finally give up the struggle to find fulfillment “out there,” we havenowhere to go but within. It is at this moment of total surrenderthat a new light begins to dawn. When we give up our old way ofdoing things, we create space for a new energy to come through.
This is like being reborn. We are infants in this new world and
have no idea how to live since none of our old ways work here. Wefeel uncertain and out of control. Y et hope is reborn in us, and anew power and vision start to come through. This can be thebeginning of developing a form that is conscious of, and integrat-ed with, our spirit.
Ram Dass has a beautiful analogy for this process. He likens it
to a clock, where 12:00 is the starting point. From 12:00 to 3:00life is totally lost in the world of form. From 3:00 to 6:00 is grad-ual “disillusionment” with the world, and 6:00 is where you hitbottom. Y ou feel that you lose everything, but as you pass through6:00 you are actually waking up to reconnecting with spirit. From6:00 back up to 12:00 is ever-increasing integration of spirit andform. As individuals, we are at various stages in this process. I havea sense that we each have one major cycle of this type lasting over78 •Living in the LightLIL Quark-Part One  1/22/01  8:49 AM  Page 78many physical lifetimes, and we also have an infinite number of
minor cycles — sometimes almost daily!
When we, as individuals, first rediscover our spirit, we are usu-
ally drawn to nurture and cultivate this awareness. This ofteninvolves withdrawing from the world to one degree or another, andgoing within. For some people this takes the form of spendingtime in nature; for some it involves practicing meditation, going toretreats, and so forth; for some it may be simply finding time to bealone and quiet. Often it’s a time of partial or complete with-drawal from relationships, work, and/or other attachments thattend to pull us outside of ourselves. For some, this phase may lastonly a few weeks or months. Each of us is unique, so we all expe-rience this shift within in different ways. In one way or another, welearn to go inside and be in that quieter place in ourselves for awhile. There we find a deeper and deeper connection with ourspirit.
While we are deeply connected with ourselves in this way, we
often find that we have a feeling of clarity, vision, wisdom, power,and love. This is because in that moment, we are connected withthe expansive energy of spirit, and not distracted by the problemsand responsibilities of dealing with the world of form.
If we choose to follow one of the traditional spiritual paths we
may remain more or less withdrawn from the world. In this way wecan be true to our spirit and avoid dealing with the attachmentsand patterns of our form. Unfortunately, we never have the oppor-tunity to fully integrate spirit and form.
In order to create the new world, we are being challenged toSpirit and Form   •   79LIL Quark-Part One  1/22/01  8:49 AM  Page 79move out into the world of form with full spiritual awareness. We
need to recognize the differences between our spirit and our formand learn to integrate them.
Integrating Spirit and Form
The first step in the process of consciously integrating form
and spirit is to be able to 
recognize and feel both the consciousness
of your spirit and the consciousness of your form. Y ou may beaccustomed to feeling only one of them most of the time, withoccasional flashes of the other. Or you may flip back and forthfrequently between the two perspectives. It’s as if one takes controlof the body for a while and you see things from that viewpoint.Then the other one takes over and suddenly everything looks quitedifferent.
This understanding can explain a lot of things that many of us
are experiencing in our lives. Why is it that we have wonderfulmoments of consciousness and clarity, and then find we have com-pletely lost our perspective and become immersed in fear and painagain? How is it that we can feel so loving, wise, and accepting  oneday and the next day feel so angry, foolish, and judgmental? Whydid we feel like we’d really “gotten it” at a workshop and then seemto “lose it” the next day? How is it that we can feel so peaceful andunattached when we are meditating, yet often our relationshipsseem like a worse mess than ever? And how come we have suchtrust in the abundance of the universe but we’re still having finan-cial problems?80 •Living in the LightLIL Quark-Part One  1/22/01  8:49 AM  Page 80The answer is simple — we are dealing with the discrepancies
between spirit and form. This is a very difficult thing to confront,and we are facing a real challenge. Many people reach this pointand have a hard time going any further.
For example, I frequently get inspiring, creative ideas for a new
project I want to do. I get a very strong vision of how wonderfulit will be and how it can work. All this is coming from my spirit,of course. I get very excited and jump into the project, making allkinds of plans and initiating many actions in that direction. A fewdays or weeks later I find myself feeling totally overwhelmed, over-worked, frustrated, and ready to throw the whole thing out thewindow. My spirit had a true vision, but I was trying to achieve itwithout regard to the needs of my human form. At this point Ihave to stop and consider what’s realistic for me, then set the pro-ject aside for a while, or allow it to take longer and develop moreslowly. My spirit tends to race ahead, so it has to learn to go at thepace my form can handle.
The second step is to 
love and accept both aspects of yourself.
They are both beautiful and vital parts of you. Without your spir-it you wouldn’t be alive — you’d only be a dead body! Withoutyour form you wouldn’t be able to be in this world — you’d beexisting in some other realm of consciousness.
It may be frustrating at times to see that your form can’t live
up to all the ideals that your spirit may have. It’s important to recognize that our form has its own wisdom and the spirit canlearn from the form just as the reverse is true. After all, we choseto come to this plane of existence in order to experience beingSpirit and Form   •   81LIL Quark-Part One  1/22/01  8:49 AM  Page 81human!
For example, many years ago I was living with a man and we
had an “open relationship” — in other words, we were free to bewith other lovers. I had a strong spiritual ideal that I could lovesomeone deeply and allow him to be free to follow energy he mightfeel with someone else, while I was free to do likewise. SometimesI was able to do this, briefly, and I had some beautiful momentswhere I felt an expansive and exhilarating unconditional love. Butmost of the time I was overwhelmed with jealousy and emotionalpain. I finally realized that my spiritual ideal simply did not fit thereality of my human feelings and needs. It became very clear to methat I could only experience the kind of emotional intimacy that Iwanted in a monogamous relationship.
One important key to integrating spirit and form is learning to
listen to your intuition and act on it. Y our inner guidance willalways move you in the direction of greater balance and integra-tion between form and spirit. Even in the process of learning totrust your inner guidance, however, you can’t move faster than yourform is ready to go.
Here is a very important point: Y ou cannot force your form 
to trust and follow intuition through 
will. Y ou must allow it to
educate itself through conscious observation.
In other words, you can’t force yourself to always follow your
intuitive feelings, even though you desire to live that way. Some-times it may seem like too big a risk; even though your spirit knowsit would work out, your form is too afraid to do it. Don’t pushyourself past what you are ready to do. Simply observe the process82 •Living in the LightLIL Quark-Part One  1/22/01  8:49 AM  Page 82and be honest with yourself about how it feels and what happens.
Then, the change will happen naturally and spontaneously.
For example, suppose you are with a friend and there’s some-
thing you want to say but you are afraid to do so for fear yourfriend will get hurt or angry and reject you. If you find you dohave the courage, go ahead and say what you feel. Then, observewhat happens and how you feel as a result. Chances are good thatyou will feel energized and empowered by the experience.
If, on the other hand, you are too afraid to speak the truth,
don’t try to push yourself past your fear. Again, simply observeyourself being with your friend and not being totally yourself.Notice that you feel deadness and loss of energy; you may also feelresentful toward your friend.
Try not to judge yourself for your lack
of action. Remember, this is a learning process.
The spirit usually tends toward expansiveness, risk-taking, and
change. The form often tends toward what it perceives to be safe-ty, security, and the status quo, because its basic task is to make surewe survive and it fears that change might mean disaster or death.
If you are able to observe yourself without rationalization or
judgment, you will begin to notice that when you trust yourselfand follow your energy fully, you feel better. Conversely, when youare controlled by old patterns of fear and holding back, you feelworse. After a while, your form gets the message clearly and beginsto 
spontaneously follow the energy instead of the old pattern
because it knows it will feel better. Eventually you have a form thatautomatically goes for the most alive energy in every situation,without having to think about it and control it.Spirit and Form   •   83LIL Quark-Part One  1/22/01  8:49 AM  Page 83In this process of learning to trust yourself, many old feelings
and deep emotional patterns will come to the surface to be healedand released. This is a very important part of it, and must beallowed to happen. Old memories and experiences may be trig-gered. Feelings of sadness, fear, pain, guilt, and rage may come up.Allow yourself to feel all of it, allow it to wash through you; it willbe released. It is being cleared out of your form. As the light ofspirit penetrates every cell of your body, it dispels the darkness.
As you learn to consciously observe the transformation
process, you will watch yourself repeating a lot of old patterns longafter you seemingly know better. Spiritually and intellectually, yourealize there is another way, but emotionally, you are still clingingto the old habits. This is a difficult time. Try to be patient andcompassionate with yourself. When you recognize the futility ofan old pattern so clearly, it’s about to change! A short time later,you will suddenly begin to respond differently, in a more positiveway.
As you do the work of integrating spirit and form you may
see your physical body change and become lighter, stronger, moreclearly defined, healthier, and more beautiful. Because your life isyour creation and the mirror of your transformation, all theforms in your life — your work, money, car, house, relationships,community, the world — will increasingly express the power andbeauty of your spirit.
Meditation
Get comfortable, relax, and close your eyes. T ake a few deep84 •Living in the LightLIL Quark-Part One  1/22/01  8:49 AM  Page 84breaths and relax your body and mind completely. Allow your con-
scious awareness to move into a deep, quiet place within you.
Imagine that there is a beautiful golden light radiating from a
place deep within you. It begins to grow and expand until it fillsyour entire body. It’s very powerful, and as it fills you, it penetratesinto every cell of your body, literally waking up each molecule tothe light. Imagine your entire body glowing and radiating with thislight. Then, see and feel your body being transformed — becom-ing healthier, stronger, and more beautiful. Imagine everything elsein your life being similarly transformed.
Exercise
See if you can observe yourself nonjudgmentally and notice
when you are able to listen to your intuitive feelings and act onthem, and when you are not. Observe how you feel and what hap-pens in each of these situations. Ask your higher power to help youlearn to trust and follow your energy more and more.Spirit and Form   •   85LIL Quark-Part One  1/22/01  8:49 AM  Page 8586
Chapter Eight
The Male and Female Within
Each of us has male and female energies within us. I believe that
one of the most important challenges we have in this world is todevelop these energies fully, so they can interact in harmony witheach other.
The eastern philosophies have always included the concept of
yin (feminine/receptive) and yang (masculine/active) and havesaid that everything in the universe is made up of these two forces.In the west, Carl Jung did pioneering and exciting work with hisconcept of the anima and the animus. He explained that men havea feminine side (anima) and women have a masculine side (ani-mus), that most of us have strongly repressed these aspects of our-LIL Quark-Part One  1/22/01  8:49 AM  Page 86The Male and Female Within   •   87
selves, and that we must learn to come to terms with them. He and
his followers have done wonderful work using dreams, myths, andsymbols to help men and women reclaim the lost, denied parts ofthemselves. Many other philosophers, psychologists, poets, play-wrights, and artists have expressed the ideas of masculine and fem-inine energies within ourselves and within everything.
As I mentioned in the introduction, the person who helped me
the most to understand the male and female within was ShirleyLuthman. Her ideas in this area were so clear, simple, and pro-found they literally began to revolutionize my life. I found that thisconcept provided me with a powerful tool — I could look at justabout anything in my life, or in the world, from the perspective ofmale/female energies and understand what was really going on somuch better! I began to adapt and reinterpret the ideas I’d learnedfrom eastern philosophy, Jung, and Luthman in my own way andincorporate them into my own metaphor. I have found that wher-ever I go, when I start to share this metaphor with people, theyreally light up. They have the same reaction I did — it makes somany things so clear.
Some people have resistance to the words “female” and “male,”
because in our culture we have so many preconceived ideas aboutwhat those words mean, so much emotional “charge” associatedwith them. If it’s more comfortable for you, substitute the wordsyin and yang, active and receptive, dynamic and magnetic, or anyother words that appeal to you.LIL Quark-Part One  1/22/01  8:49 AM  Page 87Male and Female
I think of our female aspect as our intuitive self. This is the
deepest, wisest part of ourselves. This is the feminine energy, formen or women. It is the 
receptive aspect, the open door through
which the higher intelligence of the universe can flow, the receiv-ing end of the channel. Our female communicates to us throughour intuition — those inner promptings, gut feelings, or imagesthat come from a deep place within us. If we don’t pay consciousattention to her in our waking life, she attempts to reach usthrough our dreams, our emotions, and our physical body. She isthe source of higher wisdom within us, and if we learn to listencarefully to her, moment by moment, she will guide us perfectly.
The male aspect is action — our ability to do things in the
physical world — to think, to speak, to move our bodies. Again,whether you are a man or a woman, your masculine energy is yourability to act. It is the outflowing end of the channel. The femi-nine receives the universal creative energy and the masculineexpresses it in the world through action — thus, we have the cre-ative process.
Our female is inspired by a creative impulse and communicates
it to us through a feeling, and our male acts on it by speaking, mov-ing, or doing whatever is appropriate.
For example, an artist might awaken with an inspired idea for
a painting (an image communicated from his female) and immedi-ately go into his studio, pick up his brush, and begin painting(action taken by his male).88 •Living in the LightLIL Quark-Part One  1/22/01  8:49 AM  Page 88A mother might feel sudden concern for her child (a warning
from her inner female), and run into the other room and pull thechild away from a hot stove (action taken by her male).
A businessperson might have an impulse to contact a certain
associate (guidance from his or her female), make a call (actiontaken by his or her male), and put together a new deal.
In each case, where the male and female within were in creative
union, there was a creative result — a painting, saving the child, abusiness enterprise. Even the simple sequence of feeling hungry,going to the kitchen, and fixing a meal illustrates the same process.
The union of feminine and masculine energies within the indi-
vidual is the basis of all creation. Our female intuition plus ourmale action equals creativity.
In order to live a harmonious and creative life, you need to have
both your inner female and male energies fully developed and func-tioning correctly together. T o fully integrate the inner male andfemale, you need to put the female in the guiding position. This isher natural function. She is your intuition, the door to your high-er intelligence.
Y our male listens to her and acts on her feelings. The true
function of male energy is absolute clarity, directness, and a pas-sionate strength based on what the universe inside of you, comingthrough your female, tells you.
The female says, “I feel this.” He says, “I hear your feelings.
What would you like me to do?” She says, “I want that.” He says,“Y ou want that? Okay great, I’ll get it for you.” And he goes direct-ly to get it for her, trusting that in her desire is the wisdom of theThe Male and Female Within   •   89LIL Quark-Part One  1/22/01  8:49 AM  Page 89universe.
Remember now that I am talking about an internal process in
each of us. Sometimes people externalize this idea and think I’msaying that men should let women tell them what to do! What I’mactually saying is that we 
each need to let our intuition guide us,
and then be willing to follow that guidance directly and fearlessly.
The nature of the feminine is wisdom, love, and clear vision
expressed through feeling and desire. The male nature is all-outrisk-taking action in service to the feminine, much like the chival-rous knight and his lady.
Through his surrender to her and his action on her behalf, our
male energy builds a personality structure within us that protectsand honors the sensitive energy of our intuitive female. I oftenimagine my male as standing behind my female — supporting,protecting, and “backing her up.” For a man, the image might bereversed — you might see your female as within or behind you,guiding, empowering, nurturing, and supporting you. When thesetwo energies are thus in harmony and working together, it’s anincredible feeling: a strong, open, creative channel, with power,wisdom, peace, and love flowing through.
The Old Male and the Old Female
Unfortunately, most of us have not yet learned how to allow
our male and female energies to function naturally, in the properrelationship with each other.
In our patriarchal culture, we have used our male energy (our90 •Living in the LightLIL Quark-Part One  1/22/01  8:49 AM  Page 90ability to think and act) to suppress and control our feminine
intuition, rather than to support and express her. I call this tradi-tional use of the male energy the “old male,” and it exists equallyin men and women, although it is often more obvious and externalin men, more subtle and internal in women.*
The old male is that part of us that wants to keep control. He
is terrified of our feminine power because he doesn’t want to sur-render to the power of the universe. He is afraid that if he surren-ders, he will lose his individual identity. He holds ontoindividuality and separateness at any cost. Therefore, he denies thepower of the feminine, which is a force moving toward union andoneness.
In relationship with the old male, the female is helpless in the
world. Her power cannot move directly into the physical worldwithout the support of the male’s action. Her power is suppressed,and must come out indirectly through manipulative patterns orphysical illnesses, or in sudden, unfocused ways — such as emo-tional outbursts.
Y ou can see that men and women have played out these roles
externally. In the traditional male role, men are taught to deny andsuppress their inner female, to be machine-like, unemotional, total-ly in control, and suppressive toward women (secretly, they may beterrified of women because women remind them of the power oftheir inner feminine side, which they are busy denying). BecauseThe Male and Female Within   •   91
*Sidra Stone has written a fascinating book exploring the hidden patriarchal voice in
women, called The Shadow King. See Recommended Resources.LIL Quark-Part One  1/22/01  8:49 AM  Page 91they are cut off from their internal power source, they really feel
very alone and lost.
In the traditional female role a woman also learns to use her
male energy to deny and suppress her feminine power. This leavesher helpless, dependent on men, and able to express her power onlyindirectly, through manipulation. (She may be afraid that if menfound out how powerful she is, they would abandon her, so shecarefully keeps her power hidden — perhaps even from herself.)
It’s important to realize that both the old male and the old
female exist in each sex. A woman who is expressing herself in thetraditional way described above has a controlling, macho, old maleinside her, suppressing her. She will tend to attract men who mir-ror this male personality and will act it out in their behavior towardher. This behavior may range from paternalistic and chauvinistic toverbally and physically abusive, depending on how the womantreats herself and what she believes she deserves. Once she beginsto trust and love herself more and starts to use her internal maleenergy to support herself, the behavior of the men in her life willreflect that shift. They will either change dramatically and contin-ue to change as she does, or they will disappear from her life, to bereplaced by men who are supportive and appreciative of her, whowill mirror her new attitude toward herself. I’ve seen this happenmany times.
The traditional macho man has a helpless female voice inside
of him desperately trying to be heard. He will tend to attractwomen who have a low self-image and are clingy and needy, or whoexpress their power indirectly through manipulation — little girl92 •Living in the LightLIL Quark-Part One  1/22/01  8:49 AM  Page 92cuteness, sexual seductiveness, cattiness, or dishonesty. These
women reflect his lack of trust and respect for his inner female bynot trusting and respecting themselves. By opening to, and trust-ing, his own feminine nature, he’ll find within himself the nurtur-ing, support, and connection he’s been lacking. The women in hislife will mirror this shift by becoming stronger, more independent,more direct and honest, and more genuinely loving and nurturing.
The New Male and the New Female
The feminine power, the power of the spirit, is always within
us. It is up to our male energy to determine how we relate to thatpower. We can either fight it, block it, attempt to control it, andtry to keep ourselves separate from it, or we can surrender andopen to it, learn to support it, and move with it.
Individually and collectively, we are shifting from a position of
fear and control into surrender and trust of the intuitive. Thepower of the feminine energy is on the rise in our world. As sheemerges within us and we acknowledge and surrender to her, theold male within us is transformed. He re-emerges, birthed throughthe female, as the new male — the one who goes all out in his trustand love for her. He must grow to become her equal in power sothat they can be the 
partners they are meant to be.
I believe that the new male has been truly birthed in our con-
sciousness only within the last few years. Before that, we had littleexperience in our bodies of the true male energy. Our only con-cept of male was the old patriarchal male — an energy divorcedThe Male and Female Within   •   93LIL Quark-Part One  1/22/01  8:49 AM  Page 93from the feminine.
The birth of the new male is synonymous with the birth of
the new age. The new world is being built within us and mirroredaround us as the new male (physical form) emerges in all his gloryfrom the feminine power (spirit).
An Image
Every now and then I do a visualization process in which I ask
for an image of my male and female. Each time I do it, I receivesomething a little different that teaches me something new. I’msharing with you one of the most powerful images, because it issuch a dramatic illustration of one aspect of the relationshipbetween inner female and male.
My female energy appeared as a beautiful, radiant queen, over-
flowing with love and light. She was being carried through thestreets on a litter borne by several carriers. The people were liningthe streets, waiting for an opportunity to see her. She was so beau-tiful, open, and loving that as she passed by, waving, smiling, andthrowing kisses to people, they were instantly healed of any painor limitation.
By her side walked a samurai warrior carrying a sword. This
was my male energy. It was well understood by everyone that ifanyone made a threatening move toward the queen, he wouldinstantly raise his sword and ruthlessly cut down the offender.Knowing this, naturally, no one dared to harm her.
He was willing to be absolutely unhesitating in his trust of his94 •Living in the LightLIL Quark-Part One  1/22/01  8:49 AM  Page 94own judgment and his own response, which left her completely safe
and protected. Feeling totally safe, having no need to hide ordefend herself, she was free to be completely open, soft, and lovingand to give her gifts freely and generously to all around her.
Meditation
Sit or lie down in a comfortable position and close your eyes.
T ake a few deep breaths and relax your body and mind complete-ly. Allow your conscious awareness to move into a quiet place with-in you.
Now bring to your mind an image that represents your inner
female. This image could be an actual person, an animal, or itcould be something more abstract — an energy, a color or shape,or simply a feeling. Spontaneously take whatever comes to you.
T ake a look at your female and get a sense or a feeling of what
she represents to you. Notice some of the details of the image.Notice the colors and textures. Notice how you feel about her.
Ask her if she has anything she would like to say to you right
now. Allow yourself to receive her communication, which may ormay not be in words. Y ou may also ask her any questions you have.There may be something you want to know from her. Again,receive her communication to you, whether it comes in words, afeeling, or an image.
Once you have allowed yourself to receive her communication,
and you feel complete for this moment, take a deep breath andrelease her image from your mind. Come back to a quiet, still place.The Male and Female Within   •   95LIL Quark-Part One  1/22/01  8:49 AM  Page 95Now draw to mind an image that represents your male self.
Again, take what image comes to you. It could be an image of anactual man or it could be some abstract symbol or color. Explorethis image. Begin to notice the details of it. Notice its colors andtexture. Notice how you feel about him. Then, ask him if he hasanything to communicate to you at this time. Be receptive toreceiving his communication, whether it is in words or some otherform. If you have anything you want to ask him, do this now. Beopen to any words or images you may receive. If an answer doesn’tcome to you immediately, know that it will come later.
Once you feel complete with your communication with him,
release his image from your mind. Come again to a quiet place inside.
Now, ask for the images of both your male and female to come
to you at the same time. See how they relate to one another. Arethey in relationship to one another or are they separate? If they arein relationship to one another, how do they relate? Ask them ifthey have anything they would like to communicate to one anoth-er or to you. Stay open to what comes to you in words, images, orfeelings. If you have anything you’d like to say to them or ask them,do that now.
When you feel complete, once again take a deep breath and
release their images from your mind. Come back to a quiet, stillplace inside.
Exercise
Close your eyes and contact your female intuitive voice. Ask96 •Living in the LightLIL Quark-Part One  1/22/01  8:49 AM  Page 96The Male and Female Within   •   97
her what she wants — is there a gift she desires or something she
wants to say or do? When she has told you what she wants, imag-ine your new male supporting her desire. See him taking whatevernecessary action to honor her need and desire.
When you open your eyes, do your best to follow whatever you
feel your intuition wants you to do.LIL Quark-Part One  1/22/01  8:49 AM  Page 9798
Chapter Nine
Men and W omen
W e all instinctively understand the basic functions of feminine
and masculine energies, but we may not realize that they both existin each person. More often we tend to associate male and femaleenergies with their respective body types.
Thus, women have become the symbols of female energy.
Traditionally, women have developed and expressed receptivity,nurturing, intuition, sensitivity, and emotion. In the past, manywomen more or less repressed assertiveness, direct action, intellect,and the ability to function effectively and strongly in the world.
Likewise, men have become the symbols of male energy.
Traditionally, they have developed their ability to act in the worldLIL Quark-Part One  1/22/01  8:49 AM  Page 98Men and Women   •   99
strongly, directly, assertively, and aggressively. Many men repressed
and denied their intuition, emotional feelings, sensitivity, and nurturing.
As we cannot live in the world without the full range of mas-
culine and feminine energies, each sex has been helplessly depen-dent on the other half for its survival. From this perspective, eachperson is only half a person, dependent on their other half for itsvery existence. Men have desperately needed women to providethem with the nurturing, intuitive wisdom, and emotional supportwithout which they unconsciously know they would die. Womenhave been dependent on men to take care of them and provide forthem in the physical world, where they haven’t known how to takecare of themselves.
It might seem like a perfectly workable arrangement — men
help women, women help men — except for one underlying prob-lem: as an individual, if you don’t feel whole, if you feel your sur-vival depends on another person, you are constantly afraid oflosing them. What if that person dies or goes away? Then you die,too, unless you can find another such person who is willing to takecare of you. Of course, something might happen to that personalso. Thus, life becomes a constant state of fear in which the otherperson is merely an object for you — your supply of love or pro-tection. Y ou must control that source at any cost: either directly, byforce or superior strength, or indirectly using various manipula-tions. Generally, this happens subtly — “I’ll give you what youneed so you will be just as dependent on me as I am on you, so youwill keep giving me what I need.”LIL Quark-Part One  1/22/01  8:49 AM  Page 99So our relationships have been based on dependency and the
need to control the other person. Inevitably, this leads to resent-ment and anger, most of which we repress because it would be toodangerous to express it and risk losing the other person. Therepressing of all these feelings leads to dullness and deadness. Thisis one reason why so many relationships start off exciting (“Wow!I think I’ve found someone who can really fulfill my needs!”), andend up either filled with anger or relatively dull and boring (“Theyaren’t fulfilling my needs nearly as well as I had hoped, and I’ve lostmy own identity in the process, but I’m afraid to let go for fear I’lldie without this person.”).
Finding the Balance
In recent times, of course, the strongly separated roles of men
and women have begun to shift. In the last two generations,increasing numbers of women are exploring and expressing theirabilities to act in the world. At the same time, a growing numberof men have been looking within themselves and learning to opento their feelings and intuition.
I believe this is happening because we have reached a dead-end
street with our “old world” relationships and externalized con-cepts of masculine and feminine. The old models and ways ofdoing things are too limiting for us now, and we have not yetevolved effective patterns to take their place. It’s a period of chaosand confusion, pain and insecurity, but also of tremendousgrowth. We
aremaking a leap into the new world. I believe that100 •Living in the LightLIL Quark-Part One  1/22/01  8:49 AM  Page 100every form of relationship, from the most traditional marriage to
homosexual or bisexual relationships, represents each person’sattempt to find their feminine/masculine balance within.
Women have traditionally been in touch with their female
energy but they haven’t backed her up with their male energy. Theyhave not acknowledged what they know inside. They have alwaysacted as if they were powerless when they are really very powerful.They have gone after external validation (from men especially),rather than internally validating themselves for what they knowand who they are.
Many women, like myself, have had strongly developed male
energy but have used it in the “old male” way. I was very intellec-tual, very active, and drove myself very hard to shoulder theresponsibilities of the world. I also had a very strongly developedfemale, but I didn’t put her in charge. In fact, I ignored her a lot ofthe time. I basically protected my sensitive, vulnerable feelings byerecting a tough outer shell.
I’ve had to learn to take that powerful male energy and use it
to listen to, trust, and support my female. This allows her the safe-ty and support to emerge fully. I feel and appear softer, morereceptive, and more vulnerable, but I am really much stronger thanbefore.
Women are now learning to back themselves up and validate
themselves, instead of abandoning the responsibility and trying toget a man to do it for them. However, it’s a deep-seated patternthat has endured for centuries, and it takes time to change it in thedeepest layers. The key is to just keep listening to, trusting, andMen and Women   •   101LIL Quark-Part One  1/22/01  8:49 AM  Page 101acting on our deepest feelings.
The qualities that women have looked for in men — strength,
power, responsibility, caring, excitement, romance — must bedeveloped inside of ourselves. A simple formula is this: just treatyourself exactly the way you would want to be treated by a man!
The interesting thing is that what we create within us is always
mirrored outside of us. This is the law of the universe. When youhave built an inner male who supports and loves you, there willalways be a man, or even many men, in your life who will reflectthis. When you truly give up trying to get something outside your-self, you end up having what you always wanted!
For men, of course, the principle is exactly the same. Men are,
traditionally, disconnected from their female energy, thereby dis-connected from life, power, and love. They’ve been out there in theworld secretly feeling helpless, alone, and empty, although theypretend to be in control and powerful. (W ar is a good example ofthe old male energy lacking the wisdom and direction of thefemale.) Men seek nurturing and internal connection throughwomen but once they have connected with their own inner female,they will receive her incredible love from within themselves.
For men, all the qualities you’ve wanted from a woman — the
nurturing, softness, warmth, strength, sexuality, and beauty —already exist in your inner female. Y ou will feel this when you learnto listen to your inner feelings and support them. Y ou need tototally respect and honor your inner female energy by acting onyour feelings for her. Then, every woman — every person — inyour life will mirror that integration. They will have the qualities102 •Living in the LightLIL Quark-Part One  1/22/01  8:49 AM  Page 102you’ve always wanted, and they will also receive love, warmth, nur-
turing, and strength from you.
Many men, especially in recent times, have chosen to connect
deeply with their feminine energy and, in doing so, have discon-nected from their male. They’ve rejected the old macho image andhave no other concept of male energy to relate to. These men areusually so afraid of their male energy, fearing that it will burst forthwith all the old mindlessness and violence they equate with male-ness, that they reject the positive, assertive male qualities as well.
I feel it’s very important for these men to embrace the concept
of the new male — one who allows his spontaneous, active, aggres-sive male energy to flow freely, knowing that the power of hisfeminine is in charge, wisely directing him. This requires a deeptrust that the inner female knows what she’s doing and won’t allowanything destructive or harmful to happen.
New W orld Relationships
A new idea of relationships is emerging that is based on each
person developing wholeness within him- or herself. Internally,each person is moving toward becoming a fully balanced femi-nine/masculine being with a wide range of expression, from soft-est receptivity to strongest action.
Externally, most people’s style of expression will certainly be
determined strongly by which type of body they are in — male orfemale.
When people hear these ideas they sometimes express the fearMen and Women   •   103LIL Quark-Part One  1/22/01  8:49 AM  Page 103that we will all become outwardly androgynous — men and
women all appearing pretty much the same. The reverse is actuallytrue. The more women develop and trust their male aspect to sup-port them and back them up internally, the safer they feel to allowtheir soft, receptive, beautiful feminine aspect to open up. Thewomen I know who are going through this process (myself includ-ed) seem to become more feminine and beautiful even while theyare strengthening their masculine qualities. Men who are surren-dering and opening fully to their female energy are actually recon-nected with the inner feminine power which enhances andstrengthens their masculine qualities. Far from becoming effemi-nate, the men I know who are involved in this process becomemore secure in their maleness.
In the new world, when a man is attracted to a woman, he rec-
ognizes her as a mirror of his feminine aspect. Through her reflec-tion he can learn more about his own female side and move throughwhatever fears and barriers he may have to come to a deeper inte-gration within himself. When a woman falls in love with a man, sheis seeing her own male reflected in him. In her interactions with himshe can learn to strengthen and trust her masculine side.
If you know on a deep level that the person you’re attracted to
is a mirror of yourself, you cannot be overly dependent on him orher because you know that everything you see in your partner isalso in you! Y ou recognize that one of the main reasons you’re inthe relationship is to learn about yourself and deepen your con-nection with the universe. So, healthy relationships are based onthe passion and excitement of sharing the journey into becoming104 •Living in the LightLIL Quark-Part One  1/22/01  8:49 AM  Page 104a whole person.
This might sound like we are evolving to a place where we are
so whole within ourselves that we no longer need relationships atall! The paradox is this: as human beings, we are social, interde-pendent creatures. We
doneed one another. Part of experiencing
wholeness is accepting the parts of us that need love, closeness,and intimacy with one another. So, creating conscious relationshipsinvolves honoring both our dependence and our interdependence.
Gay Relationships
My own experience in relationships is heterosexual, so I can
hardly consider myself much of an expert on gay relationships.However, from talking and working with quite a few gay and les-bian friends and clients, I do have a strong sense that on a spiritu-al level, homosexual and bisexual relationships are a powerful stepthat some beings take to break through old, rigid roles and stereo-types to find their own truth.
For some people, being in a close, intense relationship with a
person or persons of the same sex is the most powerful mirroringprocess they can find. Two women, for example, often seem to finda depth of connection with each other that they don’t find with aman. They use this intuitive feminine connection to create a strongfoundation and safe environment for each of them to practicebuilding their internal male. They totally reflect and support eachother in becoming whole and balanced.
A man sometimes seems to find a matching male intensity withMen and Women   •   105LIL Quark-Part One  1/22/01  8:49 AM  Page 105another man — an ability to go all out that he wouldn’t find with
a woman. He may also find in another man a support for movinginto and exploring his feminine self without feeling he has to ful-fill the old, stereotyped male role.
I think many of these things are mysteries that we will under-
stand only in retrospect. I believe that every being chooses the lifepath and relationships that will help him or her to grow the fastest.
As we continue to evolve, I believe we will gradually stop cate-
gorizing ourselves and our relationships with any particular labelssuch as gay, straight, and so on. I foresee a time when each personcan be a unique entity with his or her free-flowing style of expres-sion. Each relationship will be a unique connection between twobeings, taking its individual form and expression. No categories arepossible because each one is so different and follows its own flowof energy.
Exercise
Think of some of the most important women in your life.
What are their strongest or most attractive qualities? Be aware thatthey mirror some aspects of your own female energy (whether youare a woman or a man).
Now think of some of the most important men in your life.
What qualities do you most like, admire, or appreciate about them?Recognize that they reflect similar aspects of your own male ener-gy (again, this applies to you whether you’re a man or a woman).
If you have trouble seeing that some of the things you admire106 •Living in the LightLIL Quark-Part One  1/22/01  8:49 AM  Page 106Men and Women   •   107
in others are in you as well, it may be because you have not yet
developed those qualities in yourself as strongly as they have. Inthis case, try the following meditation.
Meditation
Get in a comfortable position. Close your eyes, relax, take a
few deep, slow breaths and move your consciousness into a deep,quiet place inside.
Bring to mind one person whom you admire or are attracted
to. Ask yourself what qualities you find most attractive in this per-son. Do you see those same qualities in yourself ? If not, try imag-ining that you possess those same qualities. Imagine how youwould look, talk, and act. Picture yourself in a variety of situationsand interactions.
If you feel these are qualities you want to further develop with-
in yourself, continue to do this visualization regularly for a while.LIL Quark-Part One  1/22/01  8:49 AM  Page 107108
Chapter T en
East and W est: A New Challenge
Ihave a strong feeling that in my last life I was a spiritual ascetic,
perhaps in India, and probably living in meditation on a moun-taintop somewhere. That way of life has a comfortable familiarityto it, and there is a longing somewhere within me to continue tolive in that blissful simplicity! However, I know that this time Ihave chosen to take it to the next level — to integrate the spiritu-al, mental, emotional, and physical aspects of my being and learnto live in balance in the world.
It is interesting to look at the world from the perspective of
male and female, or spirit and form; in doing so I have discov-ered some fascinating things. In a sense, the East can be seen toLIL Quark-Part One  1/22/01  8:49 AM  Page 108East and West: A New Challenge   •   109
represent the feminine polarity. Many of the Eastern cultures have
an ancient and powerful spiritual tradition. Until recently, theirstrength and development have been primarily in the intuitive andspiritual realms, at least in comparison with the Western world.They have lacked development in the physical realm and, as aresult, they have experienced a great deal of poverty, chaos, andconfusion.
The energy in the West (Europe and the United States) is
more masculine. In modern history it has focused primarily ondeveloping the physical realm while paying little attention to spir-itual development. As a result, we have made incredible techno-logical progress but we are experiencing a terrible poverty of spirit,a feeling of disconnection from our source.
These two worlds are drawn to one another just as men and
women are — with a certain amount of fear and distrust, but anoverwhelming attraction nonetheless. Eastern spiritual teachingsare flooding the West, and Western technology is gravitatingtoward the East. We are each hungry for what the other has.
One of my favorite mental pictures of my travels in India is
this: I was standing in a bazaar. In front of me were two booths.One booth had beautiful traditional handcrafted items for sale. Agroup of Europeans and Americans were crowded around it, eager-ly bargaining for the lovely treasures. The other booth proudly dis-played a variety of plastic items — bowls, kitchen utensils, evenplastic shoes. A long line of Indians patiently waited their turn topurchase these precious things. Naturally, neither one of thegroups cast even a second glance at the other booth!
East and West can learn from each other, but like women andLIL Quark-Part One  1/22/01  8:49 AM  Page 109men, they must ultimately find within themselves that which they
admire in each other. Hopefully, the developing Third Worldcountries will learn from our mistakes and develop a technologythat is more harmoniously attuned to the spirit and the environ-ment. And we in the West must develop a spiritual path that helpsus to deal with the physical world.
The Eastern spiritual traditions (and our Western spiritual tra-
ditions, as well, for that matter) are based on removing oneself asmuch as possible from the world in order to connect more deeplywith the spirit. The world, with its temptations and distractions,is a very difficult place to maintain a focus on, and commitmentto, inner truth.
Thus, most serious traditional spiritual paths have involved
some degree of renunciation of the world — relationships, money,material possessions, pleasures, and luxuries have been given up.The ideal has been to withdraw to a monastery or mountaintop andpursue a life of quiet contemplation, giving up all attachment to theworld. Even those who choose to remain householders with fami-lies and jobs have usually followed strong rules and restrictions thatare designed to keep them as separate from the world as possible.
This contemplative spiritual orientation has been a necessary
and powerful step, but it is reflective of the split we have main-tained between spirit and form, between the female and male with-in us. T o be a spiritual seeker, we have had to leave the physicalworld. “Enlightenment” has been the reason for reclaiming spiritby denying the body — transcending form by leaving it. Thus,individual beings have become “enlightened” in the sense that they110 •Living in the LightLIL Quark-Part One  1/22/01  8:49 AM  Page 110have fully realized their spiritual nature, but they have not fully
integrated that enlightenment into their form. When they haveeventually left their bodies, the world remained largely untrans-formed. These masters have supported and preserved the intuitiveprinciple in our world and have paved the way for us to take thenext step — the integration of feminine and masculine, spirit andform, and the subsequent transformation of our world.
Those of us who choose to be spiritual seekers and trans-
formers must now move 
into the world with the same degree of com-
mitment to our spiritual selves as we would have if we renounced
the world. This path is much more difficult! We are now chal-lenged to surrender to the universe, to follow its guidance and todo so 
while having deep, passionate relationships, dealing with
money, business, family, creative projects, and so many other“worldly” things. Rather than avoiding our attachments to theworld, the time has come to acknowledge and work with them. Wemust move 
into the challenging situation, move into, recognize, and
own all the feelings and attachment, and learn to embrace the fullrange of our experience.
Meditation
Relax, close your eyes, and take a few deep breaths. With each
breath, drop more deeply into a quiet place inside yourself. Fromthis place of calm, start to see a new image of yourself in theworld. Y our focus is on the universe and you follow its guidance.Y ou trust yourself. Y ou feel strong and courageous. Y ou carry aEast anad West: A New Challenge   •   111LIL Quark-Part One  1/22/01  8:49 AM  Page 111112 •Living in the Light
sense of knowingness with you into the world. Because of this
trust and focus within yourself, what you create on the outside isbeautiful. Y our world is nourishing to you and others. Y ou are hav-ing deep, passionate relationships, and are dealing with people,money, your career, your body, and everything else around you.
Y ou are able to be in the world and enjoy all worldly things, yet
keep your commitment to the universe within yourself. This com-mitment is reflected in the light and power you feel.LIL Quark-Part One  1/22/01  8:49 AM  Page 112PART TWO
Living the PrinciplesLIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 113LIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 114Chapter Eleven
Trusting Intuition
M ost of us have been taught from childhood not to trust our
feelings, not to express ourselves truthfully and honestly, not torecognize that at the core of our being lies a loving, powerful, andcreative nature. We learn easily to try to accommodate thosearound us, to follow certain rules of behavior, to suppress ourspontaneous impulses, and to do what is expected of us. Even ifwe rebel against this, we are trapped in our rebellion, doing theopposite of what we’ve been told in a knee-jerk reaction againstauthority. V ery seldom do we receive any support for trusting our-selves, listening to our own sense of inner truth, and expressingourselves in a direct and honest way.
115LIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 115When we consistently suppress and distrust our intuitive
knowingness, looking instead for authority, validation, andapproval from others, we give our personal power away. This leadsto feelings of helplessness, emptiness, a sense of being a victim,and eventually to anger and rage — and, if these feelings are alsosuppressed, to depression and deadness. We may simply succumbto these feelings, and lead a life of quiet numbness. We may over-compensate for our feelings of powerlessness by attempting tocontrol and manipulate other people and our environment. Or wemay eventually burst forth with uncontrolled rage that is highlyexaggerated and distorted by its long suppression. None of theseare very positive alternatives.
The true solution is to re-educate ourselves to listen to and
trust the inner truths that come to us through our intuitive feel-ings. Following our inner guidance may feel risky and frighteningat first, because we are no longer playing it safe, doing what we“should” do, pleasing others, following rules, or deferring to out-side authority. T o live this way is to risk losing everything that wehave held onto for reasons of external (false) security, but we willgain integrity, wholeness, true power, creativity, and the real secu-rity of knowing that we are in alignment with the power of theuniverse.
In suggesting that our intuition needs to be the guiding force
in our lives, I am not attempting to disregard or eliminate therational mind. The intellect is a very powerful tool, best used tosupport and give expression to our intuitive wisdom, rather than aswe often use it — to suppress our intuition. Most of us have 116 •Living in the LightLIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 116programmed our intellect to doubt our intuition. When an intu-
itive feeling arises, our rational minds immediately say, “I don’tthink that will work,” “nobody else is doing it that way,” or “whata foolish idea,” and the intuition is disregarded.
As we move into the new world, it is time to re-educate our
intellect to recognize the intuition as a valid source of informationand guidance. We must train our intellect to listen to and expressthe intuitive voice. The intellect is by nature very disciplined andthis discipline can help us to ask for and receive the direction ofthe intuitive self.
What does it mean to trust your intuition? How do you do it?
It means tuning in to your “gut feelings” — your deepest innersense of personal truth — in any given situation, and acting onthese feelings, moment by moment. Sometimes these “gut mes-sages” may tell you to do something unexpected or inconsistentwith your previous plans; they may require that you trust a hunchthat seems illogical; you may feel more emotionally vulnerable thanyou are used to feeling; you may express thoughts, feelings, oropinions foreign to your usual beliefs; you may follow a dream orfantasy, or take some degree of financial risk to do something thatfeels important to you.
At first you may fear that trusting your intuition will lead you
to do things that seem somewhat hurtful or irresponsible to oth-ers. For example, you may hesitate to break a date, even though youneed time for yourself, because you fear hurting your date’s feel-ings. I’ve found that when I really listen to and trust my inner voice,in the long run, everyone around me benefits as much as I do.Trusting Intuition   •   117LIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 117People may sometimes be temporarily disappointed, irritated,
or a bit shaken up as you change your old patterns of relating toyourself and others. But this is usually because as you change, thepeople around you are automatically pushed to change as well. Ifyou trust, you will see that the changes are also for their highestgood. (If you do break that date, your friend may end up having awonderful time doing something else.) If they don’t want tochange, they may move away from you, at least for a while; there-fore, you must be willing to let go of the forms of relationship youhave with people. If there is a deep connection between you,chances are good that you will be close again in the future.Meanwhile, everyone needs to grow in their own way and their owntime. As you continue to follow your path, you will increasinglyattract people who like you as you are and relate to you in a waythat feels honest, supportive, and appreciative.
Practicing a New Way of Living
Learning to trust your intuition is an art form, and like all
other art forms, it takes practice to perfect. Y ou don’t learn to doit overnight. Y ou have to be willing to make “mistakes,” to trysomething and fail, then try something different the next time —and sometimes, perhaps, even embarrass yourself or feel foolish.Y our intuition is always correct, but it takes time to learn to hearit correctly. If you are willing to risk acting on what you believe tobe true, and risk making mistakes, you will learn very fast by pay-ing attention to what works and what doesn’t. If you hold back out118 •Living in the LightLIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 118of fear of being wrong, learning to trust your intuition could take
a lifetime.
It can be hard to distinguish the “voice” of our intuition
from the many other “selves” that speak to us, from within —the different parts of ourselves that have their own idea of what’sbest for us.
People frequently ask me how to differentiate the voice or
energy of intuition from all the others. Unfortunately, there’s nosimple, sure-fire way at first. Most of us are in touch with ourintuition whether we know it or not, but we’re actually in the habitof doubting or contradicting it so automatically that we don’t evenknow it has spoken. The first step in learning is to pay more atten-tion to what you feel inside, to the “inner dialogue” that goes onwithin you.
For example, you might feel, “I’d like to give Jim a call.”
Immediately, a rational, doubting voice inside says, “Why call himat this time of day? He probably won’t be home,” and you auto-matically ignore your original impulse to call. If you had called,you might have found him at home, and discovered he had someimportant information for you.
Another example: you might get a feeling in the middle of the
day that says, “I’m tired, I’d like to take a rest.” Y ou immediatelythink, “I can’t rest now, I have a lot of work to do.” So you drinksome coffee to get yourself going and work the rest of the day. Bythe end of the day you feel tired, drained, and irritable, whereas ifyou had trusted your initial feeling, you might have rested for halfan hour and continued about your tasks, refreshed and efficient,Trusting Intuition   •   119LIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 119finishing your day in a state of balance.
As you become aware of this subtle inner dialogue between
your intuition and your other inner voices, it’s very important notto put yourself down or diminish this experience. Try to remain asomewhat objective observer. Notice what happens when you follow your intuitive feelings. The result is usually increased ener-gy and power, and a sense of things flowing. Now, notice whathappens when you doubt, suppress, or act against your feelings.Usually, you will observe decreased energy; you may feel somewhatdisempowered or depressed. Y ou may even experience emotional orphysical pain.
Whether or not you act on your intuitive feelings, you’ll be
learning something, so try not to condemn yourself when youdon’t follow your intuition (thus adding insult to injury!).Remember, it takes time to learn new habits; the old ways aredeeply ingrained. I’ve been working intensively on my own re-edu-cation for many years, and while the results I’m enjoying are won-derful, there are still times when I don’t yet have the courage orawareness to be able to trust myself completely and do exactly whatI feel. I’m learning to be patient and compassionate with myself asI gain the courage to be true to myself.
Suppose you are trying to decide whether to change jobs. Y ou
might have a conservative self that feels it would be safest to staywhere you are, an adventurous self that is eager to do somethingdifferent, a self that is concerned about what other people willthink, and so on. One way to handle this is to “listen” to each ofthese voices and write down what each has to say (perhaps using a120 •Living in the LightLIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 120Trusting Intuition   •   121
different color pen for each one). Then, just let yourself sit with
all the conflicting viewpoints for a while without trying to resolvethem or make a decision. Eventually, you will start to get an intu-itive sense of what your next step needs to be.
As you get to know the different selves within you, you will
discover that your intuitive self has an energy or a feeling that isdifferent from the other voices. In time, you will learn to recognizeit quite easily.
One important step in learning to hear and follow your intu-
ition is simply to practice “checking in” regularly. At least twice aday, and much more often, if possible (once an hour is great), takea moment or two (or longer, if you can) to relax and listen to yourgut feelings. Cultivate this habit of talking to your intuitive self.Ask for help and guidance when you need it and practice listeningfor answers that may come in many forms: words, images, feelings,or even through being led to some external source such as a book,a friend, or a teacher who will tell you just what you need to know.Y our body is a tremendous helper in learning to follow your innervoice. Whenever you feel your body is in pain or discomfort, it isusually an indication that you have ignored your feelings. Use it asa signal to tune in and ask what you need to be aware of.
As you learn to live from your intuition, you give up making
decisions with your head. Y ou act moment by moment on whatyou feel and allow things to unfold as you go. In this way, you areled in the direction that is right for you, and decisions are madeeasily and naturally. If possible, try not to make big decisions concerning future events until you are clear about what you want.LIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 121Focus on following the energy in the moment and you’ll find that
it will all be handled in its own time and way. When you mustmake a decision related to something in the future, follow your gutfeeling about it at the time the decision needs to be made.
Remember, too, that although I sometimes speak of following
your inner intuitive voice, most people do not literally experienceit as a voice. Often it’s more like a simple feeling, an energy, a senseof “I want to do this” or “I don’t want to do that.” Don’t make itinto a big deal, a mysterious mystical event, a voice from on high!It’s a simple, natural human experience that we have lost touch withand need to reclaim.
The main sign that you are following your intuition in your life
is increased aliveness. It feels like more life energy is flowingthrough your body. Sometimes it may even feel a little overwhelm-ing, like more energy than your body can handle. Y ou may evenhave the experience of feeling tired from too much energy comingthrough you. Y ou won’t bring through more energy than you candeal with, but it may stretch you a little! Y our body’s expanding itscapacity to channel the universal energy. Relax into it and restwhen you need to. Do things that help you stay grounded, such asphysical exercise, being in nature, emotional self-nurturing, andeating healthy, substantial foods. Soon, you’ll feel more balancedand you’ll even begin to enjoy the increasing intensity.
At first you may find that the more you act on your intuition,
the more things in your life seem to be falling apart — you mightlose your job, a relationship, certain friends, or your car might evenstop working! Y ou’re actually changing rapidly and shedding thethings in your life that no longer fit. As long as you refused to let122 •Living in the LightLIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 122Trusting Intuition   •   123
go of them, they imprisoned you. As you continue on this new
path, following the energy moment by moment as best you can,you will see new forms begin to be created in your life — new rela-tionships, new work, a new home, a new form of creative expres-sion, or whatever. It will happen easily and effortlessly. Things willjust fall into place, and doors will open in a seemingly miraculousway. Y ou may have times when you will just go along, doing whatyou have energy to do, and not doing what you don’t have energyto do, having a wonderful time, and you will, literally, be able towatch the universe creating through you. Y ou’re starting to experi-ence the joy of being a creative channel!
Specific Examples
Here are a few examples from my life, and the lives of my
friends and clients, of the types of situations you might be con-fronted with in following your intuition. Notice that the words inparentheses are the thoughts and feelings that might have held youback or stopped you from trusting your intuition in the past.
— Leaving a party or meeting because you realize you really
don’t want to be there (even though you’re afraid of what othersmight think or you don’t want to miss something good).
— T elling someone that you are attracted to him, or that you
would like to get to know him, or that you love him, or whatever it isthat you’re feeling, because it feels good to be open and tell the truth(even though you’re afraid of being rejected, and it makes you feelvery vulnerable, and one part of you says, “Y ou’re just not supposedto do that”).LIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 123— Deciding not to write your thesis because you really don’t
feel very interested in it; every time you think about it, it feels likea terrible chore (even though you spent five years working towardit, and your parents will be upset if you don’t get your degree,you’d really like to have the prestige, and you think you could geta better job with it).
— T aking singing lessons, music lessons, a dance class, or
whatever interests you, because you have a fantasy that you wouldlove to be able to sing, play an instrument, or dance (even thoughyou don’t think you have any talent, you’re too old to learn now, oryou might look foolish).
— Not going to work one day because you feel like you want
a quiet day to yourself to hang around home, lie in the sun, take awalk, or even just lie in bed (even though you always go to workand think it’s terribly irresponsible not to if you’re not sick, oryou’re afraid you might lose your job, or you think it’s silly or friv-olous).
— Quitting your job because you hate it and you realize that
you don’t really need to do something that you don’t like (eventhough you’re not really sure that what you’re going to do next andyou’ll only have enough money to last you for a few months, andyou feel scared about not having the security of a regular income).
— Not doing a favor for someone who’s asked you to because
you really don’t want to and you know you’d feel resentful if youdid (even though you’re afraid you’re selfish, or you might lose afriend or antagonize a co-worker).
— Spending a little money on something special for yourself124 •Living in the LightLIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 124Trusting Intuition   •   125
or someone else, on impulse, just because it makes you feel good
(even though you’re normally very frugal, and you really feel maybeyou can’t afford it).
— T elling someone your opinion about something because
you’re tired of pretending to agree with others (even though younormally wouldn’t dare express yourself that way).
— T elling your family that you’re not cooking dinner because
you just don’t feel like it (even though you’re afraid you’re being abad wife and mother and they all might find out they don’t needyou anymore and your whole identity will be shot).
— Not making a decision about something because you’re not
sure yet what you really feel about it (even though it makes you feeluncomfortable and off-balance to be in a state of indecisiveness).
— Starting your own business because you have a strong feel-
ing inside that you can do it (even though you’ve never done any-thing like that before).
Well, you’ve got the idea. Trusting your intuition means tuning
in as deeply as you can to the energy you feel, following that energymoment to moment, trusting that it will lead you where you wantto go and bring you everything you desire. It means being yourself,being real and authentic in your communications, being willing totry new things because they feel right, and doing what turns you on.
Highly Intuitive People
Many people are already highly developed intuitively. Some are
very much in touch with their intuition, but are afraid to act on itLIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 125in the world. Often, these people will follow their intuitive prompt-
ings in one specific area of their lives, but not in others. Manyartists, musicians, performers, and other highly creative people fallinto this category. They strongly trust and spontaneously act ontheir intuition within the bounds of their art form; thus, they areextremely creative and often very productive, but they don’t have thesame degree of self-trust and willingness to back their feelings withaction in other areas of their lives, particularly in their relationshipsand in matters of business and money. Thus, we have the classiccase of the artistic type who is chaotic and unbalanced emotional-ly, and/or inept or even exploited financially.
A classic example of this problem was seen in the movie 
Lady
Sings the Blues , based on the life of the great singer Billie Holiday.
In one scene, she is traveling with her show on a grueling tour ofthe country. She is feeling exhausted and depleted and yearns to gohome to see her husband and to rest. She resolves to cancel hertour and follow her heart. However, her business managers succeedin convincing her that this move would ruin her career, that shemust continue on the road. Shortly after giving in to their argu-ments, she begins to indulge heavily in drugs. From that point on,her life takes a downward and tragic course.
Naturally, one such incident does not ruin an entire life, but
this movie provides a graphic illustration of the way many artistsand performers give away their authority to other influences aroundthem and suffer the resulting inner conflict, pain, and loss ofpower. In order to come into balance, these people must learn totrust their intuition and assert themselves in all areas of their lives.126 •Living in the LightLIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 126Many psychics also experience this problem. They are very
open, receptive, and intuitive, and do not block these qualities asmany of us have done. They may even give their intuition freereign in their work or under certain conditions. Once again, theymay not fully trust and back their intuition in every moment oftheir lives, especially in the area of personal relationships. Theymay be too wide open to other people’s energies and often do notknow how to stay connected to their own individual feelings andneeds, how to assert themselves, and how to set boundaries. Frommy experience, these highly sensitive people often have problemswith their bodies — either weight problems or chronic illness.These problems are healed when they learn to balance their recep-tive, intuitive nature (feminine energy) with an equally developedwillingness to act on their feelings and assert themselves in per-sonal relationships (masculine energy).
Many spiritual seekers who have spent a good deal of time
meditating, becoming very sensitive and attuned to their energy,also have problems of imbalance. The seeker has a strong mentalimage of what it is to be “spiritual” — loving, open, and centered.He or she wants to act out this model at all times and thus is afraidto act spontaneously or  express feelings honestly for fear that whatcomes out may be harsh, rude, angry, selfish, or unloving.
Since we are human, as we risk expressing ourselves more freely
and honestly, some of what comes out will be unpolished, dis-torted, foolish, or thoughtless. As we learn to act on our inner feel-ings, all the ways in which we’ve blocked ourselves in the past arecleared out, and in that process, a lot of old “stuff ” comes to theTrusting Intuition   •   127LIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 127surface and is released. Many old beliefs and emotional patterns
are brought to light and healed. In this process, we have to be will-ing to face and reveal our unconsciousness. (By the time we can seeit, it’s already changing anyway.) If we pretend to be more “togeth-er” than we really are, we will miss the opportunity to heal our-selves. I have found this to be a very vulnerable and out-of-controlfeeling. I can’t worry too much about how I’m presenting myself orhow I look to others or whether I’m doing the right thing. I justhave to be myself as I am now, as best I can, accepting the mixtureof enlightened awareness and human limitation that is what I amright now.
It isn’t necessary to be perfect to be a channel for the universe.
Y ou just have to be real — be yourself. The more authentic, hon-est, and spontaneous you are, the more freely the creative force canflow through you. As it does so, it cleans out the remnants of oldblockages. What comes out may sometimes be unpleasant oruncomfortable, but the energy moving through will feel great! Themore you do this, the clearer your channel gets, so that what comesthrough is an increasingly perfect expression of the universe.
Remember, too, that some of our spiritual models reflect our
“good ideas” more than they reveal an accurate picture of enlight-enment. The picture that many people have of wanting to be mel-low, positive, and loving all the time is really an expression of theirneed to feel in control, good, and right. The universe has many col-ors, moods, speeds, styles, and direction; furthermore, they are allconstantly changing. Only by letting go of some of our controland risking moving fearlessly with this flow will we get to experi-ence the ecstacy of being a true channel.128 •Living in the LightLIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 128Exercise
1. Write down all the reasons you can think of for not trust-
ing and following your intuition. Include on the list any fears youhave about what might happen to you if you trust your intuitionand act on it all the time.
2. Review the meditation at the end of the third chapter (the
chapter on Intuition, see page 42).
3. At least twice a day (more often if you can remember), take
a minute to relax, close your eyes, and “check in” with your gutfeeling to see if you are doing what feels right, or if there’s any-thing you need to be aware of.
4. For one day, or one week, assume that your intuitive feelings
about things are always 100 percent right, and act as if that is so.Trusting Intuition   •   129LIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 129130
Chapter Twelve
Feelings
O ne of the most common problems I encounter in my work is
that so many people are out of touch with their feelings. When wehave suppressed and closed off our feelings, we cannot contact theuniverse within us, we cannot hear our intuitive voice, and we cer-tainly can’t enjoy being alive.
It seems that many people did not get enough real emotional
support when they were growing up. Our parents didn’t know howto support their own feelings, much less ours. Perhaps they were toooverwhelmed with the difficulties and responsibilities in their livesto be able to give us the emotional response and care we needed.
Whatever the causes, if we don’t feel anyone is there to listenLIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 130to us and care about our feelings, or if we get a negative response
when we do express ourselves, we soon learn to suppress our emo-tions. When we bottle up our feelings, we close off the life ener-gy flowing through our bodies. The energy of these unfelt,unexpressed feelings remains blocked in our bodies, causing emo-tional and physical discomfort and eventually illness and disease.We become numb and somewhat deadened.
In every workshop I give, I encounter people who have been
repressing their feelings throughout their lives. Many people areafraid to feel their so-called “negative” emotions — sadness, hurt,anger, fear, despair. They are afraid that if they open up to experi-encing these feelings, the emotions will be overwhelming. They areterrified that if they get into the experience, they’ll remain stuckforever.
In fact, the opposite is true. When you are willing to fully
experience a particular feeling, the blocked energy releases quicklyand the feeling dissolves. When counseling someone who hasblocked emotion, I support them in moving into the feeling andallowing it to overwhelm them. Once they’ve felt it completely andexpressed it, it usually dissipates within a few minutes. It’s amazingto watch people who have suppressed a painful feeling for thirty,forty, or fifty years release it within a few minutes and experiencepeace in its place. (It may be important to have the support of atherapist or support group during this process.)
Once you have experienced and released blocked emotion from
the past, a greater flow of energy and vitality will enrich your life.It is important to learn to be in touch with your feelings as theyFeelings   •   131LIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 131132 •Living in the Light
arise: in this way, they can continue to move through and your
channel will remain clear.
Emotions are cyclical in nature and, like the weather, they are
constantly changing. In the course of an hour, a day, or a week wemay move through a wide range of feelings. If we understand this,we can learn to enjoy all our feelings and simply allow them tokeep changing. But when we are afraid of certain feelings, like sad-ness or anger, we put on our emotional brakes when we start to feelthem. We don’t want to feel it completely, so we get stuck halfwayinto it and never get through it.
Often, people come to my workshops who want to learn how
to “think positively” so they won’t feel so stuck in their negativefeelings. They are surprised when I urge them to feel more of theirnegative feelings, not less! It’s only by loving and accepting all partsof ourselves that we can be free and fulfilled.
We tend to think of certain feelings as “painful” and therefore
wish to avoid them. The experience of pain, however, is actuallyresistance to a sensation. Pain is a mechanism in our physical bodythat helps us avoid physical harm or notifies us that a part of ushas been injured and needs care. If you touch a hot stove, you willfeel pain; this is resistance to the sensation of heat that you areexperiencing. It causes you to pull your hand away and thus avoiddamaging your body. If you do touch something hot for too longand burn yourself, the subsequent pain lets you know that yourbody needs healing.
So, on the physical level, pain is a useful mechanism in that it
lets us know that we are in danger. However, if a sensation isn’tLIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 132really dangerous, you can relax into it and the pain will diminish
and dissolve. For example, if you stretch a muscle farther thanusual, it will at first feel painful, but as you continue to relax gen-tly and steadily into the stretched position, the pain will bereleased. In childbirth, if a woman resists the intense sensation sheis experiencing, she will have great pain. The more she is able torelax into the sensation, the less painful it will be.
On the emotional level, it is our resistance to a feeling that
causes us pain. If, because we are afraid of a certain feeling, we sup-press it, we will experience emotional pain. If we allow ourselves tofeel it and accept it fully, it becomes an intense sensation, thoughnot a painful one.
There are no such things as “negative” or “positive” feelings —
we make them negative or positive by our rejection or acceptanceof them. T o me, all feelings are part of the wonderful, ever-changing sensation of being alive. If we love all the different feel-ings we experience, they become so many rainbow colors of life.
Here are some emotions that people seem to be most afraid of,
with a suggestion of one way you might handle them:
Fear: It’s important to acknowledge and accept your fears. If
you accept yourself for feeling afraid, and don’t try too hard topush past your fears, you will start to feel more secure, and the fearwill lessen. T ake risks when you feel ready to do so, but don’t forceyourself to do things you aren’t ready for yet.
Sadness: Sadness is related to the opening of your heart. If you
allow yourself to feel sad, especially if you can cry, you will find thatyour heart opens further and you can feel more love. If possible,Feelings   •   133LIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 133reach out for comfort and support from someone who accepts you
and your sadness and can just be with you.
Grief: This is an intense form of sadness, related to the death
or ending of something. It is our way of releasing the old so thatwe can be open to the new. It is very important to allow yourselfto grieve fully and not to cut this process short. Grief comes inwaves, at first close together, then gradually, further apart. Griefcan sometimes last a long time, or recur periodically for a very longtime. It’s necessary to accept it and give yourself as much supportas you need to get through it, whenever it comes up.
Hurt: Hurt is an expression of vulnerability. We tend to mask
it with defensiveness and blame so we won’t have to admit how vul-nerable we really feel. It’s important to express feelings of hurtdirectly and, if possible, in a nonblaming way (in other words: “Ifelt really hurt when you didn’t ask me to go with you,” as opposedto “Y ou don’t care about my feelings. How could you be so insen-sitive,” and so on).
Hopelessness: This can be the result of not trusting ourselves,
honoring our feelings and needs, nor taking proper care of our-selves. We may need to be more true to ourselves and moreassertive. Hopelessness can also be a stage we go through when weare letting go of our old patterns of control, and learning to sur-render to our higher power.
Anger: When we disown our true power and allow other peo-
ple to have undue power over us, we become angry. Usually we sup-press this anger and go numb. As we start to get back in touch withour power, the first thing we feel is the stored-up anger. So, for134 •Living in the LightLIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 134many people who are growing more conscious, it’s a very positive
sign when they begin to get in touch with their anger. It means theyare reclaiming their power.
If you have not allowed yourself to get angry much in your life,
you will start to set up situations and people that trigger youranger. Don’t focus too much on the external problem when thishappens, just allow yourself to feel the anger and recognize that itis your power. Visualize a volcano going off inside of you and fill-ing you with power and energy.
Often people are very frightened of their anger — they fear it
will cause them to do something harmful. If you have this fear, seeif you can create a safe situation where you can allow yourself tofeel it fully and express it — either alone, or with a therapist orsupport group. Allow yourself to rant and rave, kick and scream,throw a temper tantrum, throw or hit pillows — whatever you feellike doing. Once you’ve done this in a safe environment (you mayneed to do it regularly), you will no longer be so afraid of doingsomething destructive and you will be able to handle the situationsin your life more effectively.
If you are a person who has felt and expressed a lot of anger
in your life, you need to look for the hurt that is underneath it andexpress that. Y ou are probably using anger as a defense mechanismto avoid being vulnerable.
An important key in transforming anger into an acceptance of
your power is learning to assert yourself. Learn to ask for what youwant and do what you want to do without being unduly influencedby other people. When you stop giving your power away to otherFeelings   •   135LIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 135people, you won’t feel angry any more.
Acceptance of your feelings is directly related to becoming a
creative channel. If you don’t allow your feelings to flow, yourchannel will be blocked. If you’ve stored up a lot of emotions, youhave a lot of blocked energy or erupting emotions inside of youwhich don’t allow you to hear the more subtle voice of your intu-ition.
Often people need help in experiencing and releasing old emo-
tional blocks and learning to live in a more 
feeling way. If you
believe you need some help with this, find a good counselor, ther-apist, or support group. In seeking a therapist, ask people youknow for referrals and don’t hesitate to interview several until youfind one that you like. Try to find one who seems to be in touchwith his or her own feelings, relates to you in a real and honest way,and supports you in experiencing and expressing your own feelings,and in trusting yourself.
Whether you seek professional help or not, make a practice of
asking yourself frequently throughout the day how you are feeling.Try to learn to distinguish between what you are thinking and howyou are feeling (many people have difficulty with this). As much aspossible, accept and enjoy your feelings, and you will find that theyopen the door to a rich, full, and passionate life.
Exercise
When you wake up in the morning, close your eyes and put
your attention in the middle of your body — your heart, your136 •Living in the LightLIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 136solar plexus, and your abdomen. Ask yourself how you are feeling
emotionally right now. Try to distinguish your feelings from thethoughts you are having in your head. Are you feeling peaceful,excited, anxious, sad, angry, joyful, frustrated, guilty, loving, lone-ly, fulfilled, serious, playful?
If there seems to be an anxious or upset feeling inside of you,
go into that feeling and give it a voice. Ask it to talk to you andtell you what it’s feeling. Make an effort to hear it and listen to itspoint of view. Be sympathetic, loving, and supportive toward yourfeelings. Ask what you can do to take care of yourself at this time.
Repeat this exercise before you go to sleep at night, and at any
other time during the day that feels appropriate.Feelings  •   137LIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 137138
Chapter Thirteen
Balancing Being and Doing
As channels for the universe, we must have available a full range
of expression and emotion. If the higher power tells us to leap, wemust be able to leap without stopping to ask questions. If it tellsus to wait, we must be able to relax and enjoy a space of nonactiv-ity until the next message comes. We will always be pushed by ourinner guidance to explore aspects of ourselves that are less devel-oped, to express and experience ourselves in new ways. If we ignorethese inner impulses, we will be forced by external life circum-stances to explore the opposite polarities from the ones we aremost comfortable with. One way or another, our higher self makessure that we get the message of what we have to do. At times weLIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 138may swing from one polarity to the other until we come into bal-
ance.
Y ou can expect that your intuition will lead you in directions
that are new and different for you. If you are comfortable in onetype of personality or pattern, you will probably be asked to startexpressing the opposite. It’s good to know this, especially whenyou’re in the process of learning to hear your inner guidance. Agood rule might be to “expect the unexpected.”
One of the most important sets of polarities that we need to
develop and balance are the energies of being and doing. Most ofus are more identified with one of these energies, and disown theother.
The two types could be called the “doers” and the “be-ers.”
They roughly correspond to “type A ” and “type B” personalitiesin common psychological terminology.
The doers are people who are primarily action-oriented. They
know how to get things done, and they usually aren’t afraid to putthemselves out there and take risks in expressing themselves or try-ing new things. Basically, they are good at expressing their outgo-ing energy. They have trouble receiving. They don’t like feelingvulnerable. The most difficult thing for them is doing nothing —not being engaged in some type of constructive activity.Unstructured time makes them uncomfortable and they usually fillit up with lots of activity. They tend to be driven and have a hardtime really relaxing. Their male, active energy is more developed,and they may be somewhat uncomfortable with their female,receptive side.Balancing Being and Doing   •   139LIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 139Be-ers are mainly oriented toward inner attunement. They
know how to relax and take it easy. They enjoy the subtle pleasureof life and often know how to nurture themselves and others, andhow to play. They are usually flexible, and are happy to “hang out”with unstructured time. They may have trouble with action. Theyfear putting themselves out in new or unusual ways and tend tohold back a lot. They aren’t very assertive and sometimes havetrouble expressing feelings or opinions. They worry about whatothers will think of them. They may be uncomfortable in theworld and lack the confidence to deal with people, business,money, and so on. Their female, receptive energy is more devel-oped and they may be uncomfortable or distrustful of their male,outgoing side.
If you are primarily a doer, your intuition will almost surely
lead you in the direction of doing less. Y our feelings will tell youto stop, to relax and take a day off (or a week, or six months!), tospend more time alone with yourself, to spend time in nature, tospend time with no plan and no list, and just practice following theenergy as you feel it. If you consistently ignore these inner mes-sages to slow down, you may develop a minor or major illness. Thismay be the way the universe forces you to become more balanced.
The hardest thing for a doer is getting no message at all, hav-
ing to hang out and wait and “do nothing” until further guidancecomes. I am primarily a doer, a list-maker, a very active person, andone of the hardest things for me has been when the universe hasforced me to do nothing! Y et, I find that those times are the mostpowerful and inspirational of all because that’s when I can really140 •Living in the LightLIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 140stop long enough to feel my spirit. In fact, I finally realized and
had to admit that I kept busy all my life in order to avoid feelingthat power. I was afraid of “empty” time and space because it wasactually so full of the universal force.
If you are more comfortable with being you will undoubtedly
be pushed by your inner self into more action, more expression,more risk-taking in the world. The key for you is to follow yourimpulses and to try doing things you wouldn’t normally do onimpulse. Y ou don’t have to know why you’re doing something orsee any particular result from it at first. It’s important to simplypractice acting spontaneously on your feelings, especially when itcomes to dealing with people, expressing your creative energy inthe world, making money, or anything else you might normallyavoid. Don’t push yourself harder or farther than you are ready togo. It’s very important to respect your own boundaries and rhythmsfor growing. Make sure the voice isn’t coming from your innerauthoritarian self, saying, “Y ou
should put yourself out in this
way.” (If it’s a should, it’s seldom the voice of the universe.) Rather,
follow the feelings you have that guide you to practice expressingyourself and building your confidence in a supportive way.
Meditation
Get comfortable and close your eyes. T ake a few deep breaths
and each time you exhale, relax your body and mind into a deep,quiet level of consciousness. Imagine yourself as a very balancedperson. Y ou are able to relax, play, and nurture yourself frequent-Balancing Being and Doing   •   141LIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 141ly, and you enjoy having time and space in your life when there is
nothing special you have to do. Y et you act on your feelings andimpulses spontaneously, express yourself strongly and directly, andrisk trying new things whenever you are inspired to do so. Y ou livein the full range of being and doing, so you can follow your innerguidance in whatever direction it leads you.
Exercise
If you are primarily a “doer,” spend one day consciously doing
as little as possible. T ake note of how you feel and what happens.
If you are better at being than doing, take a day to practice act-
ing on any impulse or inspiration you have, without expecting anyparticular results. Try several new and unusual things, especiallythings that involve making contact with people or putting yourselfout in the world in new ways. Notice how you are feeling before,during, and after you do this.142 •Living in the LightLIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 142143
Chapter Fourteen
Authoritarian and Rebel
The authoritarian and the rebel are two parts of the personali-
ty that many of us have in one form or another. If they are strongvoices in us, they can make it difficult to sense and follow ourintuition. If we are unconscious of them, they may control ourbehavior in a way that interferes with our ability to get in touchwith our true desires. The battle between them can create tremen-dous conflict within us, as well.
As in dealing with all of our inner selves, the first and most
important step is becoming conscious of them. Once we becomeaware of them, we are already separating from being identifiedwith them. We recognize them as part of us, and we begin to have LIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 143144 •Living in the Light
conscious choice about how much power we give them. We can
appreciate them for the ways in which they’ve tried to help us, andfor what they still have to offer us.
The inner authoritarian carries our need for order and struc-
ture and the rules we have learned about how we should behave.People who grow up in a home with a strong authoritarian parentfigure, or in a very authoritarian religion, always develop a power-ful inner authoritarian self who carries all the values and rules ofthe external authority figures. It tries to protect you and keep yousafe by making sure that you follow the rules, maintain order, andbehave as a good, responsible person.
If you have a strong authoritarian self, you usually make one of
two choices: you strive to follow its rules or you rebel against them.If you follow them faithfully, you are likely to be a responsible,law-abiding person and oftentimes a high achiever. Y ou may, how-ever, lose touch with your spontaneous, free-spirited, creative ener-gies and eventually, you may even feel that you’ve lost your soul.
Some people react to their authoritarian upbringing and their
own internalized authoritarian by developing a strong rebelliousself. They become identified with the rebel and disown the author-itarian self, but it remains in the shadow of their unconscious, try-ing to control their behavior and constantly triggering the rebelinto action.
The rebel usually develops in childhood or adolescence, in an
attempt to maintain a sense of self and find some freedom in anoverly oppressive rule structure. This can literally be a life saver atthe time. Unfortunately, the rebel is just a knee-jerk reaction to theLIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 144authoritarian’s rules. It reacts in rebellion to any controlling influ-
ence from inside or out. It will automatically do the opposite ofwhatever it thinks it’s supposed to do.
Thus, it is really no freer than the authoritarian; it’s just the flip
side of the same coin. It has little to do with the person’s truedesires; it just does the opposite of what it’s told. Eventually, itbecomes a self-sabotaging force, often inclined toward addictiveand self-destructive behavior.
Many people who identify with the rebel were the “black
sheep” of their families, acting out the disowned energies of theother family members. They may continue this pattern in later life,always becoming the scapegoat or shadow carrier in every relation-ship.
The rebel will fight against any energy it fears will control it,
including legitimate authority figures, or your own internalattempts to create positive structure in your life. For example: yourboss might make a reasonable request, and you become angry andresist doing what she asks; you decide to eat a healthier diet and yourrebel immediately eats three pieces of chocolate cake; you decide toexercise in the morning and you find you’ve slept until noon.
As always, when we are overly identified with an energy, we
attract its opposite in our relationships. If you are identified withyour authoritarian voice, you will probably have a rebellious mate,rebellious children, and/or rebellious employees. If you are identi-fied with the rebel, you will constantly attract authoritarian ener-gies into your life — the police, the IRS, your mate, your boss, etc.
Whether we become overly identified with the authoritarian orAuthoritarian and Rebel   •   145LIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 145with the rebel, these identifications are unconscious, so there is no
real choice or freedom. When your authoritarian self is dictatingyour every move, or is constantly battling with your rebel, it isalmost impossible to get in touch with your intuitive feelings ortrue desires.
The key then is to become aware of, and learn to recognize,
both of these energies. Try to notice when one or the other takesover, or when they are locked in conflict. Once you become awareof them, acknowledge them for trying to help and protect you.Then see if you can drop in a little deeper to intuitively sense whatit is that you really need and want in this situation.*
A client of mine was frustrated with her career and saw that she
was bringing about her firing. She was working in an office, doingadministrative work for a salesperson. Although she had greatorganizational abilities, she found herself forgetting to do things.Her boss would come to her and remind her of what hadn’t beendone and she would fume with anger. She realized she was gettingangry anytime her boss told her to do something, however reason-able. She felt she could not afford to lose the job, but she did notwant to stay there either. She felt trapped. As we talked, she start-ed to identify the rebel side of herself. She saw she was fightingwith the authoritarian, who said she had to stay at that job, and146 •Living in the Light
*The best way that I have found to become conscious of the different selves within us
and work with them is The V oice Dialogue technique of Hal and Sidra Stone’s (seeRecommended Resources).LIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 146against her boss, who was in a “controlling” position. She went
back to her childhood and examined when she first developed arebel inside. She saw that she’d had trouble with authorities atother jobs and in school. She realized she was being triggered byold patterns.
When she saw this, she immediately wanted to change these
parts of herself. I explained to her that she could not force change.If she tried to change or fix her rebel, she’d be activating it, and therebel would continue to fight. She needed to become willing towatch herself react, to accept that this was the pattern she was act-ing out. Once she had really grasped what I was saying to her, Iasked her to close her eyes and drop into a deeper place inside her-self. She needed to ask her intuition what she really wanted.
It turned out she wanted to be a saleswoman, but was afraid to
try. She was growing angry at herself for sitting behind a deskwhen she knew there was something else she was meant to do.
After realizing what she wanted to do, she was able to come up
with several steps she could take to support her goal. She decidedto keep her job for the interim and enlist her boss’s help in hergoal. She decided to conduct several informational interviews atsales companies to get ideas of places she might want to work.Having seen clearly what she wanted and discussed the action shecould take to help herself, she felt much better.
A month later she called me and said that although her author-
itarian and rebel continue to fight it out, they seemed to have lesspower. She had continued to support her goal to do sales work andwas feeling much better about her life and less reactive to her boss.Authoritarian and Rebel   •   147LIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 147Exercise
Identify some of your rules and behaviors that feel demanding
and controlling (overly authoritarian) to you. Use the categoriesbelow, in addition to any of your own. I have given some examplesin each category.
Work:
I must work forty to sixty hours per week; I must work
hard to get anywhere; I can’t make money doing what I want.
Money: I’m never going to have enough money; I must save money
in case something happens; I must not be frivolous with money.
Relationships: I have to find a mate; I must please my mate; I
have to be monogamous; I’d better be satisfied with what I’ve got.
Sex:I have to have an orgasm every time I have sex; I have to be
in love with someone to have sex; I have to be the greatest, most sen-sual lover.
Now write down any corresponding rebel thoughts you may
have. For example, Who needs work; I’m going to quit my job; or
Who cares about money anyway, I don’t need it; or I’ll just do what
I want behind my mate’s back.
After you’ve written out the authoritarian and rebel dialogues,
drop into a deeper place and ask yourself what you most want; dis-cover what is true for you. Write down any thoughts or feelingsthat come to you.148 •Living in the LightLIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 148149
Chapter Fifteen
Relationships
R elationships in the old world have often had a primarily exter-
nal focus — we try to make ourselves whole and happy by gettingsomething from outside ourselves. Inevitably, this expectationresults in disappointment, resentment, and frustration. Either thesefeelings build up constantly and cause continual strife, or they aresuppressed and lead to emotional numbness. Still, we cling to rela-tionships out of emotional insecurity, or go from one to anothersearching for that missing piece that we haven’t yet found.
We’ve been in this tragic predicament for at least a few thousand
years; now we seem to be approaching a crisis point. Relationshipsand families as we’ve known them seem to be falling apart at aLIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 149150 •Living in the Light
rapid rate. Many people are panicky about this; some try to re-
establish the old traditions and value systems in order to cling to afeeling of order and stability in their lives.
It’s useless to try to go backward, however, because our con-
sciousness has already evolved beyond the level where we were will-ing to make the sacrifices necessary to live that way. In the past,many people were willing to hang on to an essentially dead rela-tionship for an entire lifetime because it gave them physical andemotional stability.
Now, more and more of us are realizing that it is possible to
have deeper intimacy and ongoing aliveness and passion in a rela-tionship. We’re willing to let go of old ideas about relationship inorder to search for these ideals, but we don’t know where to findthem. Many of us are still looking outside ourselves, sure that ifwe just find the right man or woman to be with, we’ll be blissful-ly happy — or thinking that if only our kids or our parents wouldbehave the right way, then we’d be fine. We’re confused and frus-trated, our relationships seem to be in chaos, and we don’t have theold traditions to lean on or anything new to take their place. Y et,we can’t go back, we must move forward into the unknown to cre-ate new kinds of relationship.
In order to do this, it’s important to understand that our exter-
nal relationships reflect our internal relationships with ourselves.My primary relationship is my relationship with myself — all oth-ers are mirrors of it. As I learn to love myself, I automaticallyreceive the love and appreciation that I desire from others. If I amcommitted to myself and to living my truth, I will attract othersLIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 150Relationships   •   151
with equal commitment. My willingness to be intimate with my
own deep feelings creates the space for intimacy with another.Enjoying my own company allows me to have fun with whomeverI’m with. And feeling the aliveness and power of the universe flow-ing through me creates a life of passionate feeling and fulfillmentthat I share with anyone I’m involved with.
Taking Care of Ourselves
Because many of us have never really learned how to take good
care of ourselves, our relationships have been based on trying toget someone else to take care of us.
As babies, we are very aware and intuitive. From the time we are
born, we perceive our parents’ emotional pain and neediness, andimmediately begin to develop the habit of trying to please themand fulfill their needs so that they will continue to take care of us.
Later on, our relationships continue along the same lines.
There is an unconscious telepathic agreement: “I’ll try to do whatyou want me to do and be the person you want me to be if youwill be there for me, give me what I need, and not leave me.”
This system doesn’t work very well. Other people are seldom
able to fulfill our needs consistently or successfully, so we get dis-appointed and frustrated. Then, we either try to change the otherpeople to better suit our needs (which never works), or we resignourselves to accept less than we really want. Furthermore, whenwe’re trying to give other people what they want, we almost invari-ably do things we don’t really want to do and end up resentingLIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 151them, either consciously or unconsciously.
At this point, we may realize that it doesn’t work to try to take
care of ourselves by taking care of others. I’m the only one whocan actually take good care of me, so I might as well do it direct-ly and allow others to do the same thing for themselves. This does-n’t mean we can’t care for and give to others; it just means that wemake a conscious choice to give or not, based on what we truly feelrather than out of fear or obligation. In fact, the better we take careof ourselves, the more we have to give.
What does it mean to take care of yourself ? For me, it means
trusting and following my intuition. It means taking time to listento all my feelings — including the feelings of the child within methat is sometimes hurt or scared — and responding with care, love,and appropriate action. It means putting my most important innerneeds first and trusting that as I do this, everyone else’s needs willget taken care of, and everything that needs to be done will get han-dled.
For example, if I’m feeling sad, I might crawl into bed and cry,
taking time to be very loving and nurturing to myself. Or I mightfind someone caring to talk to until some of the feelings arereleased and I feel lighter.
If I’ve been working too hard, I’m learning to put the work
aside no matter how important it seems, and take some time toplay, or just to take a hot bath and read a novel.
If someone I love wants something from me that I truly don’t
want to give, I’m learning to say no as clearly and lovingly as possible, and trust that he or she will actually be better off than if152 •Living in the LightLIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 152I did it when I didn’t want to. This way, when I say yes, I really
mean it.
There is a very important point I want to make here — it con-
cerns something I was confused about for a long time and finallyunderstood. T aking care of yourself does not mean “doing it allalone.” Creating a good relationship with yourself is not done ina vacuum, without relationship to other people. If it were, wecould all become hermits for a few years until we had a perfectrelationship with ourselves, and then just emerge and suddenlyhave perfect relationships with others.
It is important that we are able to be alone, of course, and
some people do need to withdraw from outside relationships to acertain degree, until they feel really comfortable with themselves.Sooner or later, though, we need the reflection that a relationshipoffers us. We need to build and strengthen our relationship withourselves in the world of form through interaction with other peo-ple.
The difference in these approaches is the focus. In the old
world of relationships, the focus was on the other person and onthe relationship itself. We communicated for the purpose of try-ing to get the other person to understand us and give us more ofwhat we needed. In new world relationships, the focus is on build-ing our relationship with ourselves and the universe. We commu-nicate to keep our channel clear and to give ourselves more of whatwe need. The words we speak may even be the same, but the ener-gy is different, and so is the result.
For example, suppose I’m feeling lonely and want my partnerRelationships   •   153LIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 153to spend the evening with me although I know that he is
planning to do something else. Previously, I might have been afraidto ask for what I wanted directly. I probably would have stayedhome alone and focused on learning to enjoy being alone. Laterwhen I talked with him, I would feel some resentment, though Iwouldn’t admit it, either to myself or him. Nevertheless, he wouldfeel this resentment and become guilty and resentful toward me.None of this would come out in the open until later when we werehaving and argument and I might say, “Well you don’t care aboutmy feelings anyway; you never want to be with me.” At this point,I’m communicating to him, telepathically, my underlying feelingthat he is responsible for my happiness.
Now (hopefully), I would be more direct from the beginning.
I’d say, “I know you have other plans, but I’m feeling a need forconnection right now and I would love it if you would spend theevening with me.” I’m taking responsibility for asking for what Iwant, and in doing so, I’m actually taking care of myself eventhough I’m asking for something from him. The key here is thatmy focus is on myself — this is what I’m feeling and this is whatI want. I have to be willing to make myself vulnerable to do this.But I have found that it is the willingness to say what I feel andwant that makes me feel whole. In a sense, I’m already feeling morefulfilled because I was willing to back myself up.
Everything is out in the open, and he’s free to respond honest-
ly. Hopefully, he will check inside to find out what’s true for him.If he wants to fulfill my request, that’s icing on the cake! If hedoesn’t, I may feel sad or hurt. I’ll communicate my feelings (again,154 •Living in the LightLIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 154I’m doing it for my own sake, to keep myself clear) and then let
go. I’ll use that evening as a time to go deeper within myself andstrengthen my connection with the universe.
I’ve found a very interesting thing. When I communicate truth-
fully and directly, in a nonblaming, nonjudgmental way, and sayeverything I really want to say, it doesn’t seem to matter so muchhow the other person responds. They may not do exactly what Iwant, but I feel so clear and empowered from taking care of myselfthat it’s easier to let go of the result. If I keep being honest andvulnerable with my feelings to my partner, family, and friend, Iwon’t end up with hidden needs or resentment.
When you take care of yourself this way, more often than not,
you do get what you ask for. If not, the next step is to let go. Goinside yourself and tune in to what your intuition is telling you todo next. Always let it take you to a deeper connection with your-self and the universe.
Thus, an important part of creating a loving relationship with
yourself is to acknowledge your needs and to learn to ask for whatyou want. We’re afraid to do this because we’re afraid to appear tooneedy. It’s the hidden, unacknowledged needs, however, that causeus to seem too needy. They aren’t coming out directly so they comeout indirectly or telepathically. People feel them and back awayfrom us because they intuitively know they can’t help us if we aren’tacknowledging our need for help!
It’s paradoxical that as we recognize and acknowledge our own
needs and ask for help directly, we are actually becoming stronger.It’s the male within supporting the female. People find it easy toRelationships   •   155LIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 155156 •Living in the Light
give to us, and we feel more and more whole.
Following Energy
I have found that when I’m willing to trust and follow my ener-
gy, it leads me into relationships with the people from whom Ihave the most to learn. The stronger the attraction (or reaction),the stronger the mirror. So, the energy will always lead me to themost intense learning situation.
It can be frightening at first to try to live this way. We have
always been terrified to trust our own feelings, especially in therealm of relationships and sexuality. Because this energy is sointense, so changeable and unpredictable, we fear that utter chaoswill reign. We’re terrified of being hurt or hurting someone else.We don’t trust that the universe knows what it’s doing, or else wedon’t trust ourselves to be able to accurately follow our inner guid-ance. And there’s good reason for this. In the area of relationships,we have so many old patterns and addictions that it is often diffi-cult to accurately hear our intuitive inner voice.
Following your energy does not mean acting out every impulse,
feeling, or fantasy that you have — that would be the road to chaos.In order to follow your energy constructively, it’s important to beaware of the various selves or voices within you, which may at timeshave conflicting feelings and needs. Through this kind of aware-ness, you can begin to sense the deeper intuitive feeling of where thelife force is trying to take you, while honoring important agree-ments, boundaries, and commitments you may have with others.
Until now, most of us have avoided dealing with our fears byLIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 156constructing stringent rule structures for all our relationships.
Every relationship is fitted into a certain category, and each cate-gory has a list of rules and appropriate behaviors attached to it.This person is a friend, therefore I behave this way; this person ismy husband, therefore he is supposed to do these things; this per-son is in my family, so this is how we act with each other; and soon. There’s very little space left to discover the truth of each rela-tionship.
Some people rebel against these rule systems and purposely
create relationships that go counter to our established culturalnorms — sometimes this is the case with nonmonogamous rela-tionships, homosexual and bisexual relationships, and so on. Ifmotivated mainly by rebellion, these relationships may be largelyreactions against the rules, and still may not involve a true attune-ment to our real needs.
Just as every being is a unique entity, unlike anyone else, every
connection between two or more beings is also unique. No rela-tionship is exactly like any other. Furthermore, the nature of theuniverse is constant change. People change all the time and so dorelationships.
So when we try too hard to label and control relationships, we
destroy them. Then, we spend a lot of time and energy fruitlesslytrying to bring them to life again.
We must be willing to let our relationships reveal themselves to
us. If we tune into ourselves, trust ourselves, and express ourselvesfully and honestly with each other, the relationship will unfold inits own unique and fascinating way. Each relationship is an amazingRelationships   •   157LIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 157adventure; you never know exactly where it will lead. It keeps
changing its mood, flavor, and form from minute to minute, dayby day, year to year. At times, it may take you closer to one anoth-er. At other times, it may take you farther apart.
Commitment and Intimacy
When we discuss the idea of trusting and following our ener-
gy, people often ask where the concept of commitment fits intothis picture.
Because we have been so focused on externals, most of us have
attempted to make a commitment to an external relationship.What we are really committing to is a certain set of rules — “Iagree to behave in such and such a manner so that we can feelsecure about this relationship.” Usually these rules are not spelledout clearly, they are assumed. People say they are in a committedrelationship but seldom clarify to themselves, or each other, whatexactly they are committed to doing or not doing.
Generally, in a romantic relationship, one assumption is that
the partners are agreeing not to have sex with anyone else. Eventhat is rather vague, though, as no one defines what “having sex”is. Often the implied agreement is not to feel sexual attractiontoward anyone else. Y et, how can you make an agreement not tofeel something? Feelings aren’t under our conscious control. Wecan make commitments about how we will behave, since we dohave conscious control of our actions. Most people find that acommitment to monogamous behavior is a necessity in order to158 •Living in the LightLIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 158preserve the sense of intimacy they desire in a primary relationship.
The important question is, do we make that commitment as a wayof controlling our partner (“I’ll be monogamous so you will haveto be, too”) or from our own integrity (“I choose to be monoga-mous because I want the depth of intimacy that it will create in myprimary relationship”).
The real problem with many of the commitments we make or
assume is that they don’t allow room for the inevitable changes andgrowth of people and relationships. If you promise to behave by acertain set of rules that come from outside of you, eventually youare going to have to choose between being true to yourself andbeing true to those rules. When you stop being honest and real,there’s not much left of you to be in the relationship. Y ou end upwith an empty shell — a nice commitment, but no real people in it!
Because this type of commitment attempts to keep the 
form of
the relationship from changing, more often than not, it simplydoesn’t last. The fact is that relationships 
do change form and no
commitment can guarantee that they won’t. No external form cangive us the security that we seek. Y ou could be married for fiftyyears and the fifty-first year your spouse could decide to leave you!
If we only realize this, it can save us so much pain. People who
divorce almost inevitably feel that they have failed, because theyassume all marriages should last forever. In many cases, however,the marriage has actually been a success — it’s helped each personto grow to the point where they no longer need the same form.
What causes the pain in many cases is that we don’t know how
to allow the form to change 
while still honoring the underlying loveRelationships   •   159LIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 159160 •Living in the Light
and connection. When you are deeply involved with another human
being, the soul connection often lasts forever. The intensity ofenergy in the relationship, however, increases or decreases in accor-dance with how much there is to be learned from it at any giventime. When you’ve learned a great deal from being with someone,the energy between you may eventually diminish to the point whereyou no longer need to interact on a personality level as much, or atall. Sometimes, the energy renews itself again later on another level.
We don’t understand this, so we feel guilty, disappointed, and
hurt when our relationships change form. We don’t really knowhow to share our feelings effectively with each other, and so weoften respond to these feelings by cutting off our connection withthe other person. This causes us real pain, because we are actuallycutting off our own deep feelings. I have found that changes inrelationships can be less painful, and at times even beautiful, whenwe can communicate honestly and trust ourselves in the process.
Most people believe that sacrifice and compromise are neces-
sary in order to preserve a relationship. The need to sacrifice andcompromise is based on a misunderstanding of the nature of theuniverse. We fear that there is not enough love for us and that thetruth may be hurtful. In fact, the universe is filled with love, andthe truth, when we can see it, is always healing.
When I’m willing to be honest and ask for what I want, to con-
tinue sharing my feelings openly, I find that the underlying truth inany situation is the same for all concerned. At first it may seem thatI want one thing and the other person wants something else. If weLIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 160both keep telling the truth as we feel it, sooner or later it works out
so that we both see that we can have what we truly want.
For example, a couple who are clients of mine were experienc-
ing a great deal of conflict about their work. They were partnersis a very successful business. She was tired of the business andwanted to do something else. He loved the work and wanted tocontinue but did not want to do it without her. They fought con-stantly about whether to sell the business (her desire) or continueand expand it (his desire).
Once they began to communicate on a deeper level, they
uncovered their fears. She yearned to express herself creatively innew ways, but was terrified that she would not be able to success-fully step out on her own without his constant support. She wasalso afraid that she would not be able to make as much money, andhe would feel resentful about her diminished contribution to thefamily income. He was afraid that he would be unable to handlethe business successfully without her; he depended heavily on hercreative input and did not trust his own intuitive capacity. Also, hefeared that his working life would be dull and drab without herwarmth and humor.
Having expressed their feelings fully, they were able to see that
they were both at the point of making a leap into a new level ofindependence and creativity. They were ready to let go of some oftheir dependency on one another and develop more trust in them-selves. She gradually withdrew from the business and started a newand very different career, which she ultimately found very excitingRelationships   •   161LIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 161162 •Living in the Light
and rewarding. He continued to run the business and developed it
in new and interesting directions. Their relationship was enhancedby their increased independence and self-confidence.
For me, commitment in relationship needs to be based on a
commitment to myself — to love, honor, obey, and cherish myown being. My commitment in relationship is to respect my owntruth and do my best to honor the other person’s truth as well. T oanyone I love, I promise to do the best I can to be honest, to sharemy feelings, to take responsibility for myself, to honor the con-nection I feel with that person, and to maintain that connection.
While we may have a strong desire and intention to maintain
a certain form of relationship (a marriage for example), we can’thave any absolute guarantees about a relationship’s form. Realcommitment allows for the fact that form is constantly changing,and that we can trust that process of change. It opens the door tothe true intimacy that is created when people share deeply andhonestly with one another. If two people stay together on thisbasis, it’s because they really want to be together. They continue tofind an intensity of love and learning with each other as theychange and grow.
Monogamy or Not
People often ask me if I think monogamy is necessary in a
primary relationship. I usually answer by sharing my own experi-ence. As I mentioned earlier in this book, at one time in my life Iexperimented with nonmonogamous romantic relationships. ILIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 162Relationships   •   163
found that while I had wonderful ideals of love and freedom,
emotionally, it was way too painful for me. I also realized thatone of my underlying motivations was my fear and ambivalenceabout commitment in relationship.
Once I learned about the many different selves within me, I
realized that some of my inner selves are monogamous and somearen’t! In fact, I found this to be fairly universal. We all have cer-tain selves who would love to be free to relate sexually to othersspontaneously, whenever they feel like it. We have other selves whoneed and desire the security and exclusivity of a monogamous rela-tionship. The vulnerable child within us, in particular, will notreally open up in a nonmonogamous relationship.
Since showing our deep vulnerability to another is a key to
intimacy, if the vulnerable child is not present in a relationship, wewill not experience the depth of closeness most of us yearn for insexual partnership.
That level of intimacy is very important to me, so I came to
the understanding that for me, a mutual commitment to monoga-mous behavior is an important element in my relationship with mypartner. We understand that attractions to others are an inevitablepart of being alive. We can feel and even enjoy those attractionswhile maintaining appropriate boundaries. If we are honest withourselves and each other, these experiences can be part of our per-
*For more information on this issue, I recommend the book Embracing Each Other and
the tapes Affairs andAttractions by Drs. Hal and Sidra Stone.LIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 163sonal growth and the growth of our relationship.*
Romance
When we meet someone who is a particularly strong mirror for
us, we feel an intense attraction (or we may experience it initiallyas a repulsion or dislike; either way, there’s a strong feeling). If thatperson is of the sex we prefer and has certain characteristics, wemay experience the feeling as a sexual attraction. When the energyis particularly strong we have an experience we call “falling in love.”
Falling in love is actually a powerful experience of feeling the
universe move through you. The other person has become a chan-nel for you, a catalyst that triggers you to open up to the love,beauty, and passion within you. Y our own channel opens wide, theuniversal energy comes through, and you have a blissful moment of“enlightenment” very similar to the experiences some people haveafter long periods of meditation.
This is the most thrilling and passionate experience in the
world and, of course, we want to hold onto it. Unfortunately, wedon’t realize that we are experiencing the universe within ourselves.We recognize that the other person has triggered this experienceand we think it is him or her that is so wonderful! At the momentof falling in love, we are accurately perceiving the beauty of thatperson’s spirit, but we may not recognize it as a mirror of our own.We just know that we feel this great feeling when we’re with them.So, we often begin to give our power away to them, and start to putour source of happiness outside of ourselves.
The other person immediately becomes an object — some-164 •Living in the LightLIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 164thing we want to possess and hold onto. The relationship becomes
an addiction: as with a drug, we want more and more of the thingthat gets us high. The problem is that we get addicted to the per-son’s form, not recognizing that it’s the energy we want. We focuson the personality and the body, and try to grab onto it, to keepit. The minute we do this, the energy gets blocked. By grabbinghold of the channel so tightly we are actually strangling it and clos-ing off the very energy we seek.
True passion brings us together but our neediness often takes
over shortly thereafter. The relationship starts to die almost assoon as it blooms. Then we really panic and usually hold on eventighter. The initial experience of falling in love was so powerfulthat we sometimes spend years trying to recreate it; but often, themore we try, the more it eludes us. It’s only when we give up andlet go that the energy may start to flow again and we can experi-ence that same feeling.
Such is the tragic nature of romance in the old world. We’ve
spent thousands of years trying to work this one out. Our favoritesongs, stories, and dramas reflect and reinforce the externallyaddicted nature of our relationships and the resulting pain andfrustration.
In the new world, we are discovering something simple and
beautiful that can heal much of our pain: the greatest romance ofall can be our love affair with life.
A Love Affair
I am finding that being alive is a love affair with the universe.Relationships   •   165LIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 165I also think of it as a love affair between my inner male and female,
and between my form and my spirit.
As I build and open my channel, more and more energy flows
through. I feel greater intensity of feeling and passion. Being inlove is a state of being that is independent of any one person.Certain people, however, seem to intensify or deepen my experienceof the life force within me. I know that those people are mirrors tome and that they are also channels for special energy in my life.
I move toward them because I want the intensification that I
experience with them. I feel the universe moving through me tothem, and moving through them to me. This could happenthrough any form of exchange. The energy itself lets me knowwhat is needed and appropriate. It’s a mutually satisfying and ful-filling exchange because the universe is giving each of us what weneed. It may be a brief, one-time experience, a glance or a shortconversation with a stranger. Or, it may be an ongoing contact, aprofound relationship that lasts for many years. I see it more andmore as the universe coming to me constantly, through many dif-ferent channels.
What I have just written is an ideal scene. I certainly am not
living it fully at every moment. Many times I am caught up in myfears and insecurities. However, I 
am experiencing it more and
more frequently, and when I do, it feels wonderful!
Exercises
1. T ake yourself on a romantic date. Do everything as if you166 •Living in the LightLIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 166were going out with the most loving and exciting partner you can
imagine. T ake a luxurious hot bath, dress in your best clothes, buyyourself flowers, go to a lovely restaurant, take a moonlight stroll,do anything else that strikes your fancy. Spend the evening tellingyourself how wonderful you are, how much you love yourself, andanything else that you would like your hear from a lover. Imaginethat the universe is your lover and is giving you everything that youwant.
2. The next time that you feel a romantic or a sexual “charge”
with someone, remember that it’s the universe you are feeling.Whatever you do, whether you act on it or not, just remember thatit’s all part of your true love affair with life.Relationships   •   167LIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 167Chapter Sixteen
Our Children
Living as a channel for the universe applies to parenting as much
as to every other area of our lives. While I don’t have childrenmyself, I have a number of friends who are using these principlesin relating to their children. It certainly isn’t easy to transform ourold concepts and patterns of raising children, but the results arewonderful to see: bright light radiating from these children, satis-faction and fulfillment for their parents, and the depth of close-ness and sharing between them.
Our old ideas of parenting usually involve feeling totally
responsible for the welfare of our children and trying to followsome behavior standard to be a “good parent.” As you learn to
168
LIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 168trust yourself and be yourself spontaneously, you may find your-
self violating many of your old rules about what a good parentdoes. Nevertheless, the energy and aliveness that is coming throughyou, your increasing sense of satisfaction in your life, and yourtrust in yourself and the universe, will do far more to help yourchild than anything else possibly could.
In a sense, you don’t have to “raise” your children at all! The
universe is the true parent to your children; you are simply thechannel. The more you are able to follow your energy and do whatis best for you, the more the universe will come through you toeveryone around you. As you thrive, your children will, too.
When babies are born, they are powerful, intuitive beings. Newly
arrived in the physical world, they spend their first years learning tolive in a body. Their
forms are younger and less experienced than
ours, but their spirits are just as developed as ours. In fact, I believe
that we often have children who are spiritually more developed thanwe are, so that we can learn from them.
Our children come into the world as clear beings. They know
who they are and what they are here to do. I believe that on somelevel of consciousness, parents and children have made an agree-ment. The parents have agreed to support and assist the child indeveloping his form (body, mind, and emotions) and learning howto operate in the world. The child has agreed to help the parentsbe more in touch with their intuitive selves. Because children havenot yet lost their conscious connection to their spirit, they provideus with considerable support in reconnecting with our own higherselves.Our Children   •   169LIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 169Our children essentially need two things from us:
1. They need to be recognized for who they really are. If we
see and know that they are powerful and sophisticated spiritualbeings and relate to them that way from the beginning, they willnot need to hide their power and lose touch with their soul, asmany of us have. Their being will receive the support andacknowledgment they need to remain clear and strong.
2. They need us to create an example for them of how to live
effectively in the world of form. As we do this, they watch how welive and imitate us. Being very perceptive and pragmatic, they copywhat we actually 
do,and not what we say.
In return for taking responsibility for these two things, we
receive from our children endless amounts of vibrant energy.Unless they are shut down at a very early age through lack of sup-port, children are very clear and powerful channels. Because theyhave not yet developed much rational censorship, they are almosttotally intuitive, completely spontaneous, and absolutely honest.From watching them, we can learn a great deal about how to fol-low energy and live creatively.
Most parents have not been able to fulfill their responsibilities
as successfully as they would have wished. In general, parents havebeen confused about their roles and responsibilities. They haven’thad any clear models or guidelines. Until very recently in humanhistory, no one did much research on parenting, and there are stillvery few resources for educating oneself about how to be a parent.Most people parent in a rather hit-or-miss fashion. So, everyonehas made plenty of mistakes.170 •Living in the LightLIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 170I’ve met a lot of parents who, now that they have become more
conscious, feel tremendous guilt and sadness in looking back onhow they’ve raised their children. It’s helpful to remember that chil-dren are powerful, spiritual beings who are responsible for theirown lives — they chose you as a parent so that they could learn thethings they needed to work out in this lifetime.
Also, it helps tremendously to know that as you grow and
evolve, they will be positively affected and supported by your trans-formation. They will change as you change, even if they are grownand live far away from you. All relationships are telepathic, so nomatter what the physical distance, they will continue to reflect you.
Because we have not been sufficiently attuned to our own being,
it’s been hard to recognize and trust the spirit within our children.Because they were physically undeveloped and rationally unsophis-ticated, we thought they were less aware and less responsible thanthey really are.
I’ve observed in many people the underlying attitude that chil-
dren are somewhat helpless or untrustworthy and that parents areresponsible for controlling and molding them into responsiblebeings. Children, of course, pick up this attitude and reflect it intheir behavior. If you recognize and treat them as powerful, spiri-tually mature, responsible beings, they will respond accordingly.
Children as Mirrors
Because young children are relatively unspoiled, they are our
clearest mirrors. As intuitive beings, they are tuned in on a feelinglevel and respond honestly to the energy as they feel it. They haven’tOur Children   •   171LIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 171learned to cover up yet. When adults do not speak or behave
according to what they are actually feeling, children pick up the dis-crepancy immediately and react to it. W atching their reactions canhelp us become more aware of our own suppressed feelings.
For example, if you are trying to appear calm and collected
when inside you are feeling upset and angry, your children maymirror this to you by becoming wild and disruptive. Y ou are try-ing to maintain control, but they pick up the chaotic energy insideof you and reflect it in their behavior. Oddly enough, if youexpress directly what you are truly feeling without trying to coverit up (“I’m feeling really upset and frustrated because I’ve had arotten day. I’m mad at the world and at myself and at you! I wantyou to be quiet so I can have peace and quiet to try to sort out myfeelings. Will you please go outside for a few minutes?”), they willusually calm down. They feel comfortable with the truth and thecongruity between your feelings and your words.
Many parents think they have to protect their children from
their (the parents’) confusion or so-called negative feelings. Theythink that being a good parent means maintaining a certain role —always being patient, loving, wise, and strong. In fact, children needhonesty — they need to see a model of a human being goingthrough all the different feelings and moods that a human beinggoes through and being honest about it. This gives them permis-sion and support to love themselves and allow themselves to be realand truthful.
Sharing your feelings with your children does not mean dump-
ing your anger on them or blaming them for your troubles. It also172 •Living in the LightLIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 172does not mean you can expect them to be your partner or therapist
and help you with your problems. The more you practice express-ing your feelings honestly as you go along, the less likely you are todo these things. Being human, however, you probably will dumpyour anger or frustration on them from time to time. Once you seethat you’ve done it, tell them you realize that you dumped on themand that you are truly sorry, and then let it go. It’s all part of learn-ing to be in close relationships.
Children also serve as our mirrors by imitating us from a very
young age. We are their model for behavior, so they pattern them-selves after us. Thus, we can watch them to see what we are doing!Children often reflect either our primary selves (in the ways theyare similar to us), or our own disowned selves (in the ways they aredifferent from us). When they behave in ways that we find upset-ting or mystifying, they are usually acting out one or more of ourdisowned selves — our shadow side. For example, a woman friendof mine is a very sweet, loving person who is a committed pacifist.She was shocked and horrified to discover that her little boy lovedplaying with toy guns; of course, he was reflecting her disownedaggressive side!
When your child does something you don’t like, tell him or her
how you feel about it and deal with it directly, but, also ask your-self in what way that behavior mirrors you or how you might besupporting it in your own process.
For example, if your children are being secretive and hiding
things from you, ask yourself if you have been really open andhonest about all your feelings with them. Is there something youOur Children   •   173LIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 173are hiding from someone or from yourself ? Is there some way you
don’t trust yourself and therefore don’t trust them? If your chil-dren are being rebellious, take a look at the relationship betweenyour own inner authoritarian and rebel. If your inner authoritari-an has a lot of control in your life, your children may be acting outyour suppressed rebellious side. Or, if you’ve acted out the rebel alot in your life, they may be imitating you.
T ake a good look at how these problems reflect your inner
process. If you learn from your experiences and grow, so will yourchildren. Externally, a lot of these problems can be worked throughby deeply and sincerely sharing your feelings and learning to assertyourself, and by encouraging your children to do the same. Y ou maywant to get support from a professional counselor or family thera-pist to help the whole family change its old patterns.
I have found that, for many people, parenting has been a conve-
nient excuse not to do their own learning and growing. Frequently,parents spend most of their time focusing on their children, tryingto make sure that the children learn and grow properly. In takingresponsibility for their children’s lives, they abandon responsibilityfor their own lives. This has the unfortunate result of making thechildren feel, unconsciously, that they have to take responsibility fortheir parents (because their parents are sacrificing for them).Children may imitate their parents’ behavior by taking responsibil-ity for other people, or they may rebel against the pressure to con-form to their parents’ expectations by acting out the opposite ofwhat their parents want.
Parents need to shift the focus of their responsibility from174 •Living in the LightLIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 174their children back to themselves, where it belongs. Remember that
children learn by example. They will tend to do what you do, notwhat you tell them to do. The more you learn to take care of your-self and live a fulfilling, happy life, the more they will do the same.
This doesn’t mean you should abandon or ignore your chil-
dren. It doesn’t mean that you let them do whatever they want. Y ouare in a deep relationship with them and like any other relation-ship, it takes a lot of caring and communication. It’s important forall of you to express feelings, make needs known, and set clearboundaries. Furthermore, you have accepted certain responsibili-ties to care for them physically and financially. Y ou have a right torequire their co-responsibility and cooperation in that process.
The key is in your attitude. If you truly see your children as
powerful, responsible entities and treat them as equal to you inspirit (while acknowledging that they are less experienced than youin form), they will mirror that attitude back to you.
From the time they are born, assume that they know who they
are and what they want, and that they have valid feelings and opin-ions about everything. Even before they can talk, ask them for theirfeelings about things they are involved in and trust your intuitionand the signals they give you to know what their answers are. Forexample, ask them if they’d like to be included in an outing or ifthey’d rather stay home with a babysitter. Trust your feelings aboutwhich choice they are making and proceed accordingly. Then payattention to the signals they give. If you take them on an outingand they cry the whole time, next time try leaving them with thebabysitter.Our Children   •   175LIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 175As they grow older, continue to include them in family deci-
sions and responsibilities. As much as possible, allow them to maketheir own decisions about their personal lives. This means theymay sometimes have to deal with the consequences of making cer-tain decisions. Offer them your love, support, and advice, but let itbe understood that their lives are basically their own responsibili-ty. Be sure you set your own boundaries clearly — what is okay andwhat isn’t. Making their own decisions does not include the rightto take advantage of you. Above all, try to communicate your hon-est feelings to them and ask them to let you know how they arefeeling. Almost all family problems arise from lack of communi-cation. Y our children certainly aren’t going to know how to com-municate clearly if you don’t know how.
It seems to be terribly difficult for parents to give up living
their children’s lives for them and start living their own. In order todo this, parents have to be willing to admit how dependent theyreally are on their children and how frightened they feel about let-ting go of them. These feelings are usually masked by a reverseprojection — parents will tell themselves that their children aredependent on them and won’t be okay if their parents start focus-ing on fulfilling their own needs.
I have found that this is a false issue. The real issue is the par-
ents’ feelings of dependency on their children, which they usuallyaren’t even conscious of! Children are so alive and exciting, parentsoften secretly fear that their lives will be drab and dull withouttheir children. Or, perhaps they are just afraid to face themselves.Once they recognize and acknowledge these feelings, they will176 •Living in the LightLIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 176begin to deal with the emptiness within themselves and their lives.
They will begin to look at what they want and how they can satis-fy themselves. They will begin to trust their own gut feelings aboutthings and act on them.
At this point, the children really start to flourish. They are
finally liberated from the unconscious task of trying to take careof their parents; they are freed to make their own lives worthwhile!The children start doing what they really need to do for them-selves. They can now become the channels they truly are.
One couple who are close friends of mine have a beautiful
daughter. Since before she was born, her parents were aware of heras a powerful being and felt that they were in communication withthat being. I was present at her home birth — a wonderful event.A few minutes after she was born, I was holding her and shelooked strongly and directly into my eyes (I had previously heardthat babies can’t focus at such an early age). It was quite apparentto me that she was well aware of what was happening.
She has been raised much as I have described. She has always
been afforded the respect that she deserved and was treated as ahighly conscious entity. As a result, she is a truly remarkable child.Wherever she goes, people remark on her strong presence. It’s easyto see that she is an open channel for the universe.
Meditation
Get comfortable, relax, and close your eyes. T ake a few deep
breaths and move your awareness into a deep, quiet place within you.Our Children   •   177LIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 177Picture or imagine your child in front of you. Look into his or
her eyes and sense the powerful being within. T ake a little time justto be with this experience and receive any feelings, ideas, or impres-sions about who your child really is. Communicate to him or her, inyour own words, your respect and appreciation. Imagine that yourchild is communicating to you his or her respect and appreciation.
If you have more than one child, do this with each one of
them. This meditation is effective in opening the love and com-munication between you and your children, whether they areinfants or adults.
Exercise
Practice telling the truth to your children and expressing your
feelings honestly with them even if you feel vulnerable and uncom-fortable about not being in control. Ask them how they feel aboutthings and try to really listen to what they have to say. If you aretempted to give advice, ask them if they want to hear it first. Ifthey don’t, tell them your 
feelings instead.178 •Living in the LightLIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 178Chapter Seventeen
W ork and Play
O ur culture is obsessed with achievement and productivity. As
a result we have an epidemic of workaholism in which most of uspush ourselves much harder than is necessary or healthy. We needto learn to relax, nurture ourselves, and have fun. Some peoplecarry the opposite polarity — they know how to relax and play,but have difficulty focusing and working hard enough to accom-plish things.
When you’re following your energy and doing what feels right
to you, moment by moment, the distinction between work andplay tends to dissolve. Work is no longer what you 
have to do and
play what you want to do. When you are doing what you love, you
179
LIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 179may work harder and produce more than ever before, but you will
experience such enjoyment and pleasure in your work that at timesit may feel like play.
Each one of us has a true purpose and each one of us is a
unique channel for the universe. We make a contribution to theworld just by being ourselves every moment. There need not berigid categories in our lives — this is work, this is play. It all blendsinto the flow of following the universe, and money flows in as aresult of the open channel that’s created. Work is no longer some-thing you have to do in order to survive and sustain life. Y ou nolonger work just for the sake of making money. Instead, the delightthat comes from expressing yourself becomes the greatest reward.The money comes along as a natural part of being alive. For some,working and getting money may no longer even be directly relatedto each other; you may experience that you are doing whatever youhave the energy to do and that money is coming into your life. It’sno longer a matter of, “Y ou do this and then you get money forit.” The two things are simply operating simultaneously in your lifebut not necessarily in a direct cause-and-effect relationship.
In the new world, it’s difficult to pin life’s work and true pur-
pose down to any one thing. In terms of looking for a career, ourold world concept told us that when we became adults, we had todecide what our career would be and then pursue an education orother steps to achieve that career. The career would then be pur-sued for most, or all, of our life.
In the new world, many of us are channels for a number of
things that may come together in fascinating combinations.180 •Living in the LightLIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 180Perhaps you haven’t found your career because it doesn’t exist yet.
Y our particular and unique way of expressing yourself has neverexisted before and will never be repeated again. As you practice fol-lowing the energy in your life, it may lead you in many directions.Y ou may express yourself in a variety of areas, all of which willbegin to synthesize in some surprising, interesting, and very new,creative way. Y ou will no longer be able to say, “I’m a writer (or afireman or a teacher or a housewife).” Y ou may be a combinationof all of those things. Y ou’ll be doing what you love, what you’regood at, what comes easily to you and has an element of challengeand excitement to it. Whatever you do will feel satisfying and ful-filling to you. It will no longer be a matter of doing things nowfor later gratification: “I will work hard now so that I can get a bet-ter job later. I will work hard now so that I can retire and enjoy mylife. I will work hard now in order to have enough money and timeto have a vacation where I can have fun.” It’s the fulfillment ofwhat you’re doing at this very moment that counts. In being achannel, everything you do becomes a contribution; even the sim-plest things are significant.
It is the energy of the universe moving through us that trans-
forms, not just the specific things we do. When I write a book thathas a certain impact on a reader’s life, it’s because of the energy ofthe universe that comes through me and connects to the reader’sdeeper levels of awareness. The words and ideas are the icing onthe cake. They are the things that enable our minds to grasp whathas already been changed. It is not so important that I wrote abook. What is important is that I expressed myself, opened up, andWork and Play   •   181LIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 181allowed the creative energy to flow through me. That creative ener-
gy is now penetrating other people and things in this world. I hadthe joy of that energy moving through me and other people hadthe joy of receiving that energy. That’s the transformational expe-rience.
Whether you are washing the dishes, taking a walk, or build-
ing a house, if you’re doing it with a sense of being right where youwant to be and doing what you want to be doing, that fullness andjoy in the experience will be felt by everyone around you. If you’rebuilding a house and somebody walks by and sees you doing it,they will feel the impact of the fullness of your experience. Theirlives will be transformed to the degree that they are ready to allowthe energy’s impact. Though they may not know what hit them,they will start to experience life differently. It’s the same whenyou’re just being. If you walk into a room, feeling whole, andexpressing yourself in whatever way feels right to you, then every-one in the room will be affected and catalyzed in their own growthprocess. Even though they may not recognize it or know anythingabout it consciously, you may at times be able to see the directresult of your channel operating. Y ou will see proof of it in watch-ing the changes in people. It is an incredibly exciting and satisfyingexperience.
Y ou can see that it may no longer be an issue of focusing on
one lifelong career. At times in your life, you may be led to focusand build structure in one particular area of knowledge or exper-tise. Y ou may choose to learn certain skills that you will use to allowyour channel to function in a way that it wants to function. If you182 •Living in the LightLIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 182do this, you will be led through the learning experience easily and
naturally. The process of learning will be just as satisfying as thedoing. In other words, it is no longer necessary to sacrifice in themoment so that in the future you will be able to have what youwant. The learning process can be fun, joyful, and exciting. Y ou’llexperience it as being exactly what you want to be doing at thattime. Practicing, learning skills, going to school — all of this canbe fun and fulfilling when you are following your intuitive guid-ance.
The work you do as a result will also be a learning experience.
For example, I teach workshops, not because I’ve mastered theinformation and I am the expert, but because I love to share myselfin this way. This sharing deepens my learning experience. Again,there is no strong boundary between learning and teaching, just asthere is no wall between work and play. It all begins to blend andweave into one integrated and balanced experience.
Most people do have some sense, at least deep inside, of what
they would love to be doing. This feeling is often so repressed, how-ever, that it is experienced only in the form of some wildly imprac-tical fantasy, something you could never do. I always encouragepeople to get in touch with these fantasies. Observe and explorethoroughly your most incredible fantasy of how you’d like to beand what you’d like to be doing. There is truth in this desire. Evenif it seems impossible, there is at least a grain of truth in the image.It is telling you something about some part of you that’s wantingto be expressed.
Y our fantasies can tell you a great deal about yourself. ManyWork and Play   •   183LIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 183times, I’ve found that people have a strong sense of what they
would like to do, yet they take up a career that is very differentfrom their desire. Sometimes they go for the opposite because theyfeel it is practical or will gain the approval of their parents or theworld. They figure it is impossible to do what they really want, sothey might as well settle for something else that comes along. Iencourage people to risk exploring the things that really turn themon. The following are examples of people I’ve worked with andtheir exploration of their true purpose:
1. A brilliant and talented woman I know had been working
with sick and dying people for many years. Although she was agreat nurse and a powerful healer, it became evident to her that sheneeded to be where she could express herself more creatively. Withencouragement, she started working fewer days as a nurse andbegan leading workshops and counseling people. Because she’sdoing this, she feels more fulfilled and those around her feel herfulfillment, as well.
2. Joseph was a young man in his early twenties. Following fam-
ily tradition, he went into business with his father and brothers. Hewas very successful in real estate and contracting. The problem was,he knew there was something else he wanted to do with his life.After lots of encouragement from the group in one of my work-shops, he admitted that he wanted to work in the arts, but knew hisfamily would frown on it. He most wanted to be a dancer. The firststep was admitting to himself what he wanted to do. Eventually, hemustered the courage to take dance classes. He had a lot of talentand immediately attracted the attention of the teacher. He contin-184 •Living in the LightLIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 184ued to explore this form of artistic expression. When he support-
ed his desires, he actually found that his family was equally sup-portive.
3. A close friend of mine had three children, no college edu-
cation, and was living on welfare. Her desire was to get into busi-ness. She intuitively felt she was going to handle large amounts ofmoney, but considering her situation, this didn’t make sense.Nevertheless, she decided to explore some possibilities in thefinancial district of San Francisco. She was immediately hired as areceptionist; she went on to be an administrative assistant and con-tinued to rise to higher levels of skill and responsibility. She even-tually reached her goal of being a stockbroker. She loves what she’sdoing and her children are flourishing as well.
4. A woman who came to a recent workshop of mine shared
that she’d been a talented pianist with hopes of becoming a con-cert pianist. Then, for several reasons, the most predominant beinga lack of faith in herself, she had given up her dream. She startedworking in an office and found that between work and her chil-dren, she had little time for her music. After fifteen years, she feltit was simply too late to ever go back to the piano. She felt the timeshe had lost in not playing rendered hopeless any chance of beinggreat. Despite all her doubts, we encouraged her to at least startplaying again. I assured her that if she was doing what she loved,it would come back to her easily. As she opened to this idea, shestarted opening to herself. Her sense of hopelessness was replacedby a renewed sense of power. She called later to say she had beenWork and Play   •   185LIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 185playing the piano and feeling great about it. A friend had asked her
to play accompaniment for a choral group and she was feeling veryexcited about the musical possibilities starting to happen for her.Meditation
Sit or lie down in a comfortable position. Close your eyes and
relax. T ake several slow, deep breaths, relaxing your body moredeeply with each breath. T ake several more breaths and relax yourmind. Release and relax all the tension in your body. If you want,imagine that your body is almost sinking into the floor, bed, orchair.
From this very relaxed place inside, imagine that you are doing
exactly what you want in your life. Y ou have a fabulous career thatis fun and fulfilling for you. Y ou are now doing what you’ve alwaysfantasized about and getting well paid for it.
Y ou feel relaxed, energized, creative, and powerful. Y ou are suc-
cessful at what you do because it is exactly what you want to bedoing.
Y ou follow your intuition moment to moment and are richly
rewarded for it.
Exercises
1. Follow any impulses you have in the direction of your true
work/play/creative desires. Even if it seems totally unrealistic, fol-low the impulse anyway. For example, if you’re sixty-five years oldand have always wanted to be a ballet dancer, go to a ballet class186 •Living in the LightLIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 186and observe; or, if you want, take a beginning class. W atch some
ballet and imagine that you’re a dancer. While alone at home, puton some music and dance. This will get you in touch with the partof yourself that wants to be expressed that way. Y ou may end updancing much more than you thought possible, and you may be ledto other forms of expression that will feel as good.
2. List any fantasies you’ve had around work, career, or creativ-
ity, and beside that, list the action you plan to take to explore this.
3. Write an “ideal scene” — a description of your perfect job
or career exactly as you would like it to be. Write it in the presenttense, as if it were already true. Put in enough description anddetails to make it seem very real. Put it away somewhere, and lookat it again in a few months or even a year or two. Unless your fanta-sy has changed completely in that time, chances are that you willfind you have made significant progress in the direction of yourdream.Work and Play   •   187LIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 187188
Chapter Eighteen
Money
M oney is a symbol of our creative energy. We have invented a
system whereby we use pieces of paper or metal to represent a cer-tain unit of creative energy. For example, you earn money by usingyour energy, then you trade that money to me in exchange for theenergy I put into writing this book or leading a workshop, and soforth. Because the creative energy of the universe in all of us is lim-itless and readily available, so, potentially, is money. When we fol-low our inner guidance and move with the flow of energy in ourlives, we find we have enough money to do the things we truly needand want to do. A shortage of money often mirrors the fact thatour energy is blocked in other ways.LIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 188Y our ability to earn and spend money abundantly and wisely is
based on your ability to be a channel for the universe. The strongerand more open your channel is, the more will flow through it. Themore you are willing to trust yourself, and take the risks to followyour inner guidance, the more likely you are to have all the moneyyou need. The universe will pay you to be yourself and do whatyou really love!
Money in the Old W orld
The old world is based on our attachment to the external,
physical world. We look for satisfaction from external things.Because we believe that survival depends on getting things, we maythink that fulfillment can be found in material wealth.
In the old world, you can build a strong financial structure and
earn lots of money by learning how to act effectively in the world(the old male energy). However, because your actions are not basedon the guidance of the universe that comes from the inner female,building your financial structure will often involve fear, competi-tion, and struggle, and you will pay a high price for the money. Y oucan earn money, but find that you are ruled by it. Y ou think themoney itself is important: “If I have enough money, I can do thesethings and then I’ll be happy,” or “If I have enough money, thenI’ll feel good about myself and I’ll be happy,” or “Other people willlike me if I have enough money and that will make me happy.”From this point of view money is seen to be the important thing,but as long as it is valued in this way, money is always a problem.Money   •   189LIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 189If you have too little money, you’re always struggling to get
more money and always afraid there won’t be enough. There’salways that terrible pain inside that you don’t have enough of whatyou need. On the other hand, from this perspective, even if youhave a lot of money, it’s painful because you’re always afraid you’regoing to lose it. Y ou can never have enough money to ensure thatyou won’t be afraid.
People with little money seldom realize that people who have
a lot of money are also frightened. They are basically insecurebecause they never know if they might lose their money.Circumstances out of their control might arise — they mightmake a foolish investment or somebody might steal their money. Ifsecurity is based on having money, it doesn’t matter whether youhave a little or a lot, you’re going to be afraid.
If we don’t realize that money is a symbol of infinite energy,
and we think there is only a limited amount of it in the world,we’re stuck with two options: we can choose to have a lot of moneyand feel guilty, or we can choose to do without and resent thosewho have more. If you chose to have money, you will live with theknowledge that others have less than you. Y ou may fear that yourhaving more causes others to have less. Y ou may choose to dealwith the guilt by trying to deny or ignore the feeling, or you maychoose to ease your conscience by attempting to help those whoare less fortunate.
On the other hand, you can choose to say, “I won’t carry that
guilt. I won’t take more than my share. I don’t care about moneyanyway. Therefore, I will keep what I have to a minimum. I’ll makesure that I am not taking from somebody else.” The problem with190 •Living in the LightLIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 190this attitude is that you may end up feeling deprived. Y ou see all
the beautiful, wonderful things in the world that you would like tohave and enjoy, but you can’t. Y ou see other people who have morethan their share of money and you resent them. Basically, in thisold world framework, we must choose either guilt or resentment.
The old world structure demands we do things out of our indi-
vidual strength, instead of allowing the universe to do it. We thinkwe have to work really hard to get what we want — the work ethicthat says, “Work hard. Sacrifice and struggle.” Most of us havethat so deeply embedded in us that we don’t allow ourselves to suc-ceed financially or in any other way, except through hard work,struggle, and sacrifice. If you are succeeding and making money,you are also paying a price emotionally, and often physically. Peoplefrequently drive themselves to the point of sickness or death. Theystruggle and sacrifice emotionally, and in the end, even though theyhave achieved worldly success, they still feel deprived and empty.
Or, people refuse to go after it at all. “Look what it leads to:
struggle, sacrifice, pain, and deprivation of oneself, so I simplywon’t deal with it. I’ll get by on the absolute minimum amount ofmoney in my own life.” Often, more sensitive, spiritually inclinedpeople choose this route so they can focus on more “meaningful”things. The problem with this is you’re actually depriving yourselfof dealing with one of the most exciting and beautiful things inlife. If you’re denying money, you’re also denying a big part of theenergy of the universe and the way the world works. People whochoose the denial route usually don’t know how to handle moneyand refuse to learn anything about it.Money   •   191LIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 191Money in the New W orld
The new world is based on trust of the universe within us. We
recognize that the creative intelligence and energy of the universeis the fundamental source of everything. Once we connect withthis and surrender to it, everything is ours. Emptiness is filled fromthe inside.
We realize that money is a reflection of the energy moving
through our channel.
The more we learn to operate in the world based
on trust in our intuition, the stronger our channel will be and the moremoney we are likely to have.
The money in our life is based on our
ability to listen to our inner guidance and risk acting on it. Whenyou let go of trying to control and you learn how to listen to theuniverse and act on it, money increasingly comes into your life. Itflows in an easy, effortless, and joyful way because there is no sac-rifice involved. Y ou’re no longer attached to it. Instead, you canexperience the joy of learning how to follow the energy of the uni-verse. Money is an extra bonus in the process.
Y ou know that the money is not really yours — it belongs to
the universe. Y ou act as a caretaker or steward for the money. Y ouuse it only as you are directed by the universe through your ownintuition. There is no fear of loss because you know you are alwaystaken care of. The money may come or go, but you can’t lose thejoy and fulfillment in your life. When you feel this secure and free,you often attract more and more money, so that you are continual-ly pushed to deepen your trust at more intense levels with higherstakes. Ultimately, as channels, many of us will be called upon to192 •Living in the LightLIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 192handle large amounts of money from this place of surrender and
commitment to the higher power. This is one of the ways that thepower of the universe can be wielded effectively to transform theworld.
Active and Receptive
There are active and receptive aspects of the process of chan-
neling money, as in every other creative process. The masculine oractive way of making money is to go out after something. Y ou seesomething you want and go for it. The feminine or receptive wayof making money is to attract what you want to you.
We have to be able to do both. We need to release the outgo-
ing energy that wants to move toward a certain goal and risk fear-lessly acting on it. We also need to practice nurturing ourselves,appreciating ourselves, and becoming attuned to our inner selvesso that we can attract and receive what we want. Many people aredeveloped on one side or the other. They either know how to goafter things, but have a hard time attracting things to them, or theyknow how to attract things but are afraid to go out after them.Often a balancing process is necessary. Y ou may need to learn toreceive the gifts, appreciation, love, and energy coming to you. Oryou may need to practice outflowing your energy into the world,which keeps it flowing through your channel. This way, the ener-gy doesn’t get blocked on either end.
This means, on a practical level, you have to be willing to take
some risks in the area of work and money. If you do only what youMoney   •   193LIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 193think you should doin order to make money and be secure, then
you won’t listen to the intuitive voice that tells you what you real-ly 
need to do.
This can be very scary when it entails your job and your money.
People often want to know, “What do I do if my intuition tells menot to go to work one day? What do I do then? Will I lose myjob?” If taking off a day from work seems too risky, it may not bethe best choice for you yet. Y ou may need to strengthen your chan-nel by following your impulses in smaller ways at first. Y ou maycall in and take half a day off or you may plan for a three-dayweekend. One day though, you may wake up and know, “I justdon’t want to go to work,” and you will follow through with thisand feel good about it. Usually, when my insides tell me to taketime off, I need some nurturing, some peace and quiet, some cre-ative time for inspiration to come through, or time to simply feelold feelings stirring up inside, feelings that need to be felt andreleased.
If you risk following your impulse, you’ll find, maybe a few
hours or days later, your energy will actually be renewed. Y ou’ll beable to go back and do what needs to be done in a fourth of thetime. Y ou’ll do it in a much more inspired and creative way.Anything can happen if you risk and trust yourself. While home,you may receive a phone call from a person offering you a betterjob that pays much more money (that happened to a friend ofmine). Y ou may get a creative inspiration that will open up a fun,prosperous opportunity for you or you may get an inspiration togo visit someone who will give you a lead to a great adventure. If194 •Living in the LightLIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 194you hate your job, though, your energy for it won’t come back.
Also, because your true creative energy is blocked, you’ll continueto feel blocked financially. Eventually, you will probably leave yourjob because you cannot stay stuck in such a place for long.
Basically, the whole issue of money is doing what you really
want to do as much of the time as possible. The universe willreward you for taking risks on its behalf. It’s important, though,that the risks you take are proportionate to the level of structureyou’re building. In other words, if you’re just beginning to learnhow to trust and follow your intuition, you probably don’t want tomake a million-dollar deal on a gut feeling. Y ou probably don’twant to leap off a building and hope that you can fly. It is impor-tant that you build small things first. Practice following your intu-ition in everyday things. Say no, even though you’re feelingpressured to say yes. Do the thing you want to do even though youdon’t know why. Do it on an impulse. Make that call. Enroll in thatclass. Think of the things you love to do, and do them. This willstrengthen you to the point where you can make the big leaps.
Balance
Once you understand the basic process of learning how to fol-
low your intuition and act on it, you have your groundwork forchanneling money. There are, though, some aspects of relatingmore specifically to money that are important to know.
Balance is an important quality to develop in building the struc-
ture of your channel. If you have been extreme in one direction, youmay have to go to the extreme in the other direction in order to inte-Money   •   195LIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 195grate and balance both aspects of everything. For example, if you
have been very careless and casual about money, or if you have beena person who has denied the existence or importance of money inyour life, you may need to build structures specifically related tomoney. These include: learning to balance your checkbook, budget-ing money, and gaining an understanding of the rules that governhow money works in the world. Y ou will find these practices inter-esting, even fascinating. They are no longer something that willblock you from the spirit; they will open the way for you to havemore spirit flowing through you.
People who have little understanding of money have usually
chosen to avoid structure on one level or another because they feelrules, regulations, and details will keep them from experiencing themagic of life. They’re afraid they’ll spend all their time in theirrational mind, instead of following their flow. If you have this fear,tune in and ask the universe for guidance. Y ou’ll want to do this ina way that makes you feel good. Perhaps it would help to hiresomeone to show you how to organize your finances. It does nothave to be a painful process. Y ou’ll find it to be energizing andsupportive in your life, as opposed to painful and boring.
Those who have already applied a great deal of structure to
working with money in the world may need to let go and relax thatstructure. It’s time to stop following your rules and allow theinspired aspect of the spirit of money to work in your life. Trustyour intuition to guide you, and take more risks in doing thingsdifferently than usual.
Similarly, if you’ve been a person who has saved your moneyLiving in the Light   •   196LIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 196and been very careful about spending it, you need to learn to spend
more impulsively based on your intuition. Spend on the basis of agut feeling of wanting something. Learn to follow these impulsesand you’ll find you won’t end up broke. In fact, it actually createsa greater flow of money in your life. Y ou’re able to release and giveit out, based on your intuition.
If you have been a spendthrift and always spent more than you
actually have, you will probably need to plan more and budget.Again, do it in accordance with an inner feeling. If you’re open toit, your intuition will tell you, “Hey, learn something about plan-ning. Learn something about budgeting.” It will support and helpyou. It won’t make you feel restricted. If you follow your intuitionabout this, you will be led to people who can show you how to doit, and it will be an interesting process. Again, it will support yourchannel.*
Focus
Another important thing to know about how money works is
that it will always flow into whatever you’ve created in your life toreceive it. Because it’s energy, it will be attracted to what you needor want or envision. If you have always operated on a survival levelwith money, having only enough money to take care of your basicneeds, that’s where your money will go. If you start to attract moremoney into your life, you may have the tendency to increase yourMoney   •   197
*If you have serious chronic money problems or debts, I recommend getting help
from Debtors Anonymous, one of the Twelve-Step programs.LIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 197basic needs and still only make enough to survive.
That’s what happened to me for a long time. I had an
underlying program that said, “I can only have as much money asI need. It’s not okay to have more than I need. Consequently, Icreated more needs, and ones that weren’t particularly rewarding.My car would break down and I’d have expensive repair bills, or mycat would get sick and I’d have an expensive vet bill. Any extramoney that came in would go toward something that was an emer-gency or a basic need. There was still nothing extra for fun and cre-ative play or greater luxury.
I found that I needed to create a budget that included what I
wanted as well as what I needed. I started at a reasonable level: “I’dlike to buy at least one item of clothing each month that’s fun ormore luxurious. I’d also like to do some activity that would befun.” I would include these in my budget and the money for themwould then flow in. That’s the power of budgeting. A budget islike a blueprint. If you create a list, a picture in your mind of whatyou want to have in your life, you will create the necessary money.Y ou can just keep expanding step by step.
My Money History
For most of my adult life I had very little money. I never
focused much on money; I wasn’t particularly interested in it.Essentially, I did whatever I had to do to pay my rent and bills, butI put most of my time and attention into my education and mypursuit of consciousness and creative expansion.198 •Living in the LightLIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 198I always did whatever I needed to get the money — various
projects, housework, odd jobs, even my own business. Only onetime in my entire life did I have a nine-to-five job — for sixmonths!
I was used to living on the edge without much sense of where
my money was coming from. In those years, I learned to trust thatsomehow the money would be there. Sometimes I would get downto my last dollar and then, somehow or other, more money wouldcome. I was always cared for.
Then, gradually, as I began to use this process more and more,
learning to trust my intuition and act on it, learning to listen to myinner guidance and risk putting myself out in the world, I devel-oped a career counseling people, teaching workshops, writing, andpublishing books. As I followed my passion, I began to earn moremoney and to lead a more abundant lifestyle. It continued to thepoint where I was actually making a good income and living in abeautiful apartment, doing most of the things that I wanted to do.I came to count on that amount of money, although it was nevera secure thing. I was still living from month to month, but moneyalways seemed to keep flowing. I constantly affirmed my trust inthe universe to take care of me, and I tried to follow its guidance.
But a time came, all of a sudden, when I had no money. Some
unexpected things happened and I was caught short. I paid my rentand my bills, and I looked in my checkbook and there was noth-ing left. I didn’t have any savings or other resources to fall back on.That was a very startling experience because by that time, I wasused to having a certain amount of money.Money   •   199LIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 199What amazed me about this experience is that I had only five
minutes of fear. I thought, “Oh my god, what am I going to do?”Then, I felt totally calm. I had to have that five minutes of fear —and then, it was as if there were no more fears about money leftafter that. I knew I was going to be okay.
A key point to this is that I knew I would be willing to do what-
ever the universe asked me to do. I remember thinking, “Well, I lovemy apartment, but I could give it up. I love all the things I have, butI could give them up. If the universe wants me to go live in a tentin someone’s backyard, I’ll do that. It will probably be wonderful.”
There was an incredible feeling of trust and knowing that none
of the things I might lose were that important. Whatever I didnext, even though it might be totally different, would be wonder-ful, too. I would be taken care of. It wasn’t just an intellectualknowing, because I had already known this 
intellectually for a long
time. Living through those five minutes of fear left me with a feel-ing of fearlessness. Emotionally, I knew that I was okay. It was avery profound experience.
I ended up cutting back a little bit on my expenses and lifestyle.
That felt fine and I didn’t feel deprived at all. In fact, it was a nicediscipline for a while. Everything I needed was provided. Moneycame in to cover my expenses and I had a feeling of relief. I knewI had come to the level of income my form could currently han-dle. I wasn’t ahead of myself in any way and from then on, it wasas if I came to earth and was building from a solid foundation. Atthat moment, I felt I was standing on a strong base of trust in theuniverse. From then on, I knew the amount of money in my lifewould keep expanding, and I would never go back to not having.200 •Living in the LightLIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 200After that happened, there was an increasing flow of money in
my life. I moved to a new level of business and finance that I hadnever dealt with before. I had become really good at learning howto follow the universe on one level, but the new challenge was learn-ing to trust at a more expanded level where the stakes were higher.
In confronting this new level of prosperity, I felt at first rather
ignorant and helpless. I knew I needed help, so I asked the universeto send me the right people to teach and guide me in this area.After interviewing a number of different financial advisors, I wasled to both an accountant and a business manager who were per-fect for me and who helped me learn what I needed to know.
Like most people, I have found that as my income expands, my
expenses and responsibilities seem to expand right along with it!Interestingly enough, it seems to work in reverse as well; I alwaysseem to create exactly as much money as I need to support thelifestyle I have created. Sometimes, when I’m confronted with a largeunexpected expense, I wonder how it’s going to get handled. One wayor another, it always does, often in surprising and unexpected ways.
It frequently seems as if some higher power within me is
watching over me and making the whole thing work. My job is tokeep learning more on a practical level about managing my busi-ness and financial situation, while continuing to do my inner workof learning not to push myself so hard, and how to relax andreceive more easily. The more I bring myself into balance, the moresmoothly money flows in my life.*Money   •   201
*For more of my ideas and practical techniques about money and prosperity, please
read Creating True Prosperity and The Creating True Prosperity Workbook.LIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 201Here is a wonderful story that illustrates the miraculous way
the universe works when we trust and follow our intuition. In theoriginal edition of
Living in the Light, I wrote about buying a piece
of property in Hawaii because I had a strong intuitive feeling thatit was the right thing to do. Logically, it did not make sense, andmy financial advisors were not in favor of it. Still, I went aheadbecause it felt right to me. One factor in this decision was the factthat this beautiful land was about to be bought by an unscrupulousand exploitive developer. At the time I wrote the book, I wasn’tquite sure what would happen next, but felt very empowered bytrusting myself that much.
Subsequently, I had many moments of doubting that decision.
I wanted to create a home and a retreat center in Hawaii, but I soonrealized this piece of land was not large enough. Also, this land wason Maui and I felt strongly that I needed to be on Kauai. I even-tually decided to sell this property. It took quite some time beforeit was sold, however, and ultimately resulted  in a moderate finan-cial loss for me. Since the sale was handled by an agent, I didn’tmeet the purchasers of the property. I chalked the whole thing upto a learning experience and eventually bought the property I real-ly wanted on Kauai (where I still live).
A few years later, my mother, who lives on Maui, happened to
meet the two men who had bought my property. They told her thisamazing story:
They had been living in Los Angeles, working hard and longing
for a big change in their lives. They read my book
Creative
Visualization and decided to move to Hawaii. They began visualiz-
ing the ideal property they would like to find there, and got a very202 •Living in the LightLIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 202vivid image and feeling about it.
They took a trip to Maui and looked at many pieces of prop-
erty, but none was right. Just as they were about to leave, they wentto see one last piece, and it was exactly as they imagined! Someoneelse had put in an offer, but that offer fell through, and they wereable to buy it. Only when they signed the papers did they realizethat they were buying my property!
We eventually became friends. They developed the property
beautifully, creating a lovely flower farm and bed and breakfast,and have lived there happily for many years. I now feel that I wasguided to buy that property in order to make sure that it got to thepeople who were meant to care for it. I may have lost some money,but I gained enormous satisfaction.
Meditation
Sit or lie down in a position that is comfortable for you. Close
your eyes and begin breathing in an easy, natural way. With eachbreath, you are becoming more deeply relaxed.
Begin to notice how you’re feeling. How do you feel emotion-
ally? How does your body feel? Notice the energy in your body.What does it feel like? See yourself taking in more energy witheach breath. Y ou are energized and alive.
Start to imagine this energy as money. As you open to your
own energy, you open to abundance.
Imagine having all the money you need to do the things that
are most important to you, and to create a lifestyle that is in har-Money   •   203LIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 203mony with your being and with the earth.
Exercise
Lack of money may mirror the energy blocks within you.
Write down all the ways in which you limit your desires and cre-ativity. In what ways are you not doing what you want to do?
Some examples of this are:1. I’m doing administrative work in an office when I’d rather
be working with children.
2. I want to meditate, but there’s never time.3. I’d like to explore my art more, but I have no time; I have to
earn a living.
4. I want to tell my mother (friend, partner) how I’m feeling,
but am afraid I’ll hurt her (him).
Now imagine yourself doing exactly what you want to do in
each of these areas.204 •Living in the LightLIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 204Chapter Nineteen
Health
O ur body is our primary creation, the vehicle we have chosen
to express us in the physical world. By looking at our bodies, lis-tening to them, and feeling them, we can read a great deal aboutour spiritual, mental, and emotional energy patterns. The body isour primary feedback mechanism that can show us what is and isn’tworking about our way of thinking, expressing, and living.
Any normal child, who has had a reasonably positive environ-
ment, has a beautiful, lively body filled with vitality. That beauty,aliveness, and vitality are simply the natural energy of the universeflowing freely through, unimpeded by negative habits. Small 
205
LIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 205children in a supportive environment are totally spontaneous
beings. They eat when they are hungry, fall asleep when they aretired, and express exactly what they feel. Therefore, their energydoesn’t get blocked, and they are constantly renewed and revitalizedby their own natural energy.
But because none of us have had even a close to perfect upbring-
ing, very early we begin to develop habits that run counter to ournatural energy. These habits are designed to help us survive in theneurotic world in which we find ourselves. We pick these patternsup from our families, friends, teachers, and the community in gen-eral.
As we follow the behavior we have observed in others, or as we
attempt to follow the rules laid down by others, we may move inways that are counter to our own natural flow. We stop acting onwhat we know physically and emotionally; we no longer say and dowhat we really feel. We stop listening to the signals our body givesus about the food, rest, exercise, and nurturing it needs. It becomestoo risky to follow our own energy, so we block that flow andgradually begin to experience less and less energy and vitality. Asthe energy flow diminishes, the body is not physically revitalized asquickly; thus, it begins to age and deteriorate. As we repeat chron-ic negative behaviors, our bodies begin to reflect these patterns,such as hunching over to express the inner pattern of making one-self small and powerless.
If you are willing to allow the energy of the universe to move
through you by trusting and following your intuition, you willincrease your sense of aliveness and your body will reflect this206 •Living in the LightLIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 206with increasing health, beauty, and vitality. Every time you don’t
trust yourself and don’t follow your inner truth, you decrease youraliveness and your body will reflect this with a loss of vitality,numbness, pain, and eventually physical disease.
Dis-ease is a message from our bodies, telling us that, in some
way, we are not following our true energy or supporting our feel-ings. The body gives us many such signals, starting with relativelysubtle feelings of tiredness and discomfort. If we don’t pay atten-tion to these cues and make the appropriate changes, our bodieswill give us stronger signals, including aches, pains, and minor ill-nesses. If we still don’t change, a serious or fatal illness or accidentmay eventually occur. The stronger messages can often be avoidedby paying attention to the subtler ones. But once a strong messagehas come, it is never too late to be healed, if that is what we trulydesire. At this point, however, many beings do not choose the heal-ing. They decide to leave their bodies and start over with a new one(or move to another realm) rather than trying to work their waythrough all the old patterns in this one.
If you are suffering from dis-ease, rest. Y our body always wants
rest and ease if it’s sick. Then, when you’ve become quiet, ask yourbody what the message in your illness is. Y our body will alwaysattempt to tell you what you need in order to heal yourself.
One of my friends had been having severe pain on the right
side of her face. Intuitively, she felt the pain would ease if she’dopen her mouth and state more of what she wanted and more ofwhat she knew. She did this and the pain eased some, but it stillwasn’t gone. One night, in a mood of surrender, she told the uni-Health   •   207LIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 207verse she was sick of the whole thing and she asked for an answer.
Then, she let go of thinking about the problem and went to sleep.In her dreams that night, her intuition told her to stop takingbrewer’s yeast. She immediately discounted the entire message asbizarre and continued to take yeast. Then a few days later, aftercontinued prodding from her intuition, she stopped taking yeast.Two days later, her face pain cleared up.
When you ask for a healing, you never know what your body
is going to tell you. It may tell you to stop or start eating some-thing, express some feelings to a friend, quit your job, or go see adoctor. The key is to ask and then listen for a response.
A client came to me who had been suffering from severe back
pain for a year and a half. During the session, I asked him to con-tact the pain and ask his body what it was trying to tell him. Indoing this, he realized he had not yet grieved his mother’s death orexpressed the anger he felt toward his father. He was holding bothanger and sadness in his back. Recognizing this relieved some ofthe pain. After more talking, he was able to cry about his mother’sdeath. Shortly after this, he became willing to express his angertoward his father. He started by talking to me about it, as well aswriting out all his feelings. His back pain went away. His back painhas continued to be a barometer of suppressed feelings: he knowsnow that if he’s in pain he needs to “back himself up” by express-ing some feelings.
Once we’ve developed a symptom, it can recur if the behavior
recurs. Our bodies serve us by accurately informing us of anyblocked energy. Below I’ve listed some common causes of pain or208 •Living in the LightLIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 208illness in the body. These may or may not be accurate for you.
Each is accompanied with a healing affirmation. Use them if theyfeel right for you, or make up your own.
Headache: two conflicting energies or feelings within; allow
both sides to have a voice.
I am now willing to hear all my feelings.
Cold: the body needs rest, a clearing out of the old; the body
needs to get back into balance.
I  am now willing to let go of the old. I now have rest and ease
in my life. My body is in perfect harmony. 
Complexion problems: held back male energy; a need to take
action and/or express yourself more directly.
I go all out for what I feel and what I want. I express my feel-
ings clearly and directly.
Skin rashes: wanting to break out and take action; ask yourself,
“What am I itching to do?”
I act on what my intuitive tells me. I am willing to try new things.
I do what I want to do.
Allergies: a lack of trust in the intuitive or instinctual energies;
repressed feelings; allergies related to watery eyes are often indica-tive of suppressed sadness.
I trust and express my feelings. It’s safe to feel and express my
sadness and anger.
Back pain: a feeling that you have to support others, the world.
A need to express and support your feelings; lower back pain isHealth   •   209LIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 209often suppressed sadness; upper back pain is often 
suppressed anger.
I support all my feelings. I take care of myself. I express and trust
my feelings. I trust others to take proper care of themselves.
Menstrual cramps: not fully listening to and honoring your
female aspect; a need to be quiet and go within.
I honor my female completely and act on what she tells me to do.
I relax, rest, and nurture myself regularly.
Vision problems: not wanting to look at certain things within
yourself or in the world. Often there is a decision early in life notto look at what you are intuitively “seeing” because it is toopainful; when the inner vision is shut down, the external vision isimpaired as well.
I am now willing to see everything in my life clearly.
Hearing problems: needing to shut out external voices and influ-
ences; needing to listen more to your inner voice.
I don’t have to listen to anyone else. I listen to, and trust, my own
inner voice.
Addiction
The more uncomfortable we are about trusting our natural
energy, the more likely we are to use drugs such as coffee, ciga-rettes, alcohol, unwholesome foods or too much food, marijuana,speed, cocaine, or whatever, to attempt to manipulate our energy.We thereby deplete and denigrate the body further.210 •Living in the LightLIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 210Most people are afraid of their energy and power. They’re
either afraid of being too much or too little; they’re afraid ofhaving too much energy or not enough. The truth is, if peoplewould be willing to let go of using addictive substances, they’d findtheir own perfect flow of energy. By doing this, they’d tap theirtrue source of power and creativity.
I see addiction as a means people use to pace (control) this
power. Many powerful and creative people become addicts becausethey do not have an internal strength to support their energy.Without a trust in the universe, one’s power and creativity can seemoverwhelming. With substances, you can force your natural energyor you can dampen it, but either way, you’re stopping the naturalflow of the universe coming through.
Y ou don’t have to be a full-blown addict to realize you’re using
a substance to manipulate your energy. Y ou may realize you’redrinking three cups of coffee to energize yourself then discoveryou’re depleted later. (We are a nation addicted to coffee, which Iconsider a strong drug because it seriously impairs your ability totrust and follow your energy.)
The key is to notice what you’re doing. Become aware of when
and why you use coffee. Notice how it changes your energy.Eventually, you will find that you don’t need to pay that price any-more.
Realize that we all use some form of addiction to pace our-
selves. The cure for this is to build trust in ourselves and the uni-verse. Become increasingly willing to experience your own powerand strength. This is the true healing.Health   •   211LIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 211For those who have a drug or alcohol addiction, noticing that
you’re pacing yourself is not enough. It may make you more awareof your problem and how shut down you are, but generally thephysical craving takes over any awareness. Because of this, I encour-age people to get help and support through a group such asAlcoholics Anonymous or Narcotics Anonymous to recover fromalcohol or drug addiction. This gives the body a chance to heal andthe spirit and emotions a chance to be heard.
For more information about self-healing, you may wish to read
my book
The Four Levels of Healing: A Guide to Balancing the
Spiritual, Mental, Emotional, and Physical Aspects of Life.
Meditation
Sit or lie down, close your eyes, and take a few deep breaths.
With each breath, feel your body letting go into a deeply relaxedplace. Relax your mind and let your thoughts drift. Try not toattach yourself to any thoughts you’re having. Feel yourself relaxinto a quiet place within.
This deep place is a source of nourishment and healing for
you. Know that you can go here and find anything you need toknow to heal yourself. If you’ve been having a problem with yourhealth or you have a question you want to ask your intuition aboutyour body, take the opportunity to do this now.
Ask, “What do I need to do to heal myself now? What does
my body need?” When you’ve asked, stay open to any answers thatwill come to you. An answer or an intuitive feeling may come right212 •Living in the LightLIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 212away, or it may come in the next couple of days. It may come to
you in a direct solution or you may be guided to a person or placethat will give you the answers you need.
Know that you can heal yourself and that limitless wisdom lies
within you.
Say these affirmations silently or aloud,
“I am now healing
myself. I am energized, alive, and filled with radiant health.”
Alternative Meditation
If there is a particular part of your body that is sick or in pain,
try this meditation. Get comfortable, take a few deep breaths,completely relax your body and mind. Now, put your conscious-ness into that place and ask it what it is feeling and what it is try-ing to tell you. Then, be receptive to feeling and hearing what itsmessage to you is. Ask that part of your body what you need to doto heal yourself. Pay attention to, and follow, whatever it tells you.Health   •   213LIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 213Chapter Twenty
Y our Perfect Body
H aving a beautiful body starts with following the natural flow
of your energy. Trust yourself. Express yourself physically in waysthat feel good. Sleep as much as you need to. Stay in bed if youfeel you need more rest. Eat what your body truly desires and fol-low your heart. If you’re willing to trust your body, you’ll learnwhat’s best for you.
It sounds simple enough. The problem is that we’ve been
taught to distrust our bodies and see them as needing to be con-trolled. Some religions even suggest that the spirit is good and thebody is a weak, sinful tool of the devil. Although we have evolvedto the point where these beliefs are not generally expressed openly,
214
LIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 214we still respond to our bodies with mistrust. As a culture, we’re
accustomed to ignoring our bodies and their needs. Our minds tellour bodies what to do. We decide that a nine-to-five workday, withthree meals a day, is a “reasonable” way to live; then, we expect ourbodies to cooperate, even if this doesn’t feel good. We’ve also devel-oped, intellectually, theories for what’s good for us and what isn’t,what foods we should and shouldn’t eat.
As children, we usually adopt parental and societal rules and
habits regarding food. Even if you want to eat something else fordinner or want to eat at a different time, you’re most likely expect-ed to conform to the norms of the system. The body can tell youone thing and society another. Many of us learn to distrust our-selves at an early age. This distrust causes internal conflict and animbalance in our system. It can set up a lifelong battle between theauthoritarian and rebel voices within us. When we rebel, we mayfind ourselves craving all kinds of things we would not normallydesire if left to our natural flow. We may develop the habit ofgoing for the quickest available high. Our bodies may react to thisimbalance by gaining weight, becoming hyperkinetic, losingweight, or developing food addictions and allergies. Then, to solvethese problems, we may try even harder to control ourselves by fol-lowing a rigid, restrictive diet. This causes us to feel deprived, soeventually, the rebel takes over again and brings on the very foodswe were trying to avoid.
We may play out this same conflict in regard to physical exer-
cise. Many people believe the only way they can keep their bodiesin shape is to push themselves to exercise in a very driven way. WeYour Perfect Body   •   215LIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 215may resist this by becoming lethargic and never exercising at all.
Our society fosters this struggle and profits from it. We are
constantly shown what a beautiful body should look like, and aresold ways of getting there. We are sold diets, miracle weight-lossplans, low calorie or fat-free foods, and health club memberships.We are constantly beating our bodies into some new idea of healthand beauty. The problem with the external pictures and “shoulds”we adapt from outside of ourselves is that we are constantly dis-satisfied with the way we look or the way we feel.
The way to a healthy, strong, and beautiful body is to learn to
trust and love yourself. Y ou can begin this process by becomingaware of all the rules and ideas you have about how you shouldlook and feel. What you should eat, how you should exercise, andso on. It can help to write these down, adding more to the listwhenever you become aware of another belief or rule. The processof writing down these ideas can help you become less identifiedwith them, so that you can begin to have more choice about whichones, if any, you want to follow. In the process of doing this, youmay discover more of your inner primary selves, such as the per-fectionist (who has very high ideals it wants you to live up to), thepusher (who drives you to accomplish the perfectionist’s goals),and the critic (who constantly reminds you of how you are failing).
Once you gain some awareness of these ideas and energies,
and are not so unconsciously controlled by them, you can begin toask yourself what you truly want and tune into your own intuitivefeelings about what is really right for you.
Y our own body and your intuition are, ultimately, the best
guides about what is good for you and how to take care of yourself.216 •Living in the LightLIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 216Y ou may find that once you are paying attention, your body will
spontaneously let you know what it needs to eat and how it wantsto move and exercise. Some people find that just by following theirenergy, they develop their own personal diet and exercise programthat is exactly what their body needs, and this may change fromtime to time. For example, at certain times, their body may wantto exercise vigorously, in which case it feels wonderfully exhilarat-ing and satisfying. At other times, it may want to rest, or exercisevery gently.
Many people find that they need additional information and
structure, in which case their inner guidance leads them to theappropriate books, nutritionist, exercise coach, doctor, or teacher.It is perfectly fine and can be very helpful to follow someone else’sdiet or exercise program as long as it feels right for you.
The process of healing your relationship to your body may
take some time and require some help and support. Our feelingsabout our bodies are usually connected to very deep issues relatedto our self-esteem, our identities, our families, our sexuality, and soon. It can be helpful to have the support of a therapist whileexploring these core issues.
If you have chronic weight problems, food addictions, or an
eating disorder and are not currently in therapy, I strongly recom-mend seeking help from a therapist, support group, or treatmentprogram that specializes in these issues. Fortunately these days,there are many excellent programs and counselors in this field.Many people also find help in this area through OvereatersAnonymous, one of the twelve-step programs, which are free andavailable in most cities.Your Perfect Body   •   217LIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 217Assertion
One of the most important keys to creating a healthy, beauti-
ful body is learning to assert yourself consistently in your life. Ihave found that many people with body issues have a pattern ofdoubting themselves, of being afraid to trust their feelings and acton them. They especially need to learn how to say “no” to otherswhen they don’t want to do something. Many overweight peopleI’ve worked with don’t have strong personal boundaries; they try toplease and take care of others and allow others to intrude on themand take advantage of them. Thus, they need to use extra weightas a buffer, a way of creating some distance from others.
Women, in particular, may fear that by becoming slim, they will
be too sexually attractive. They are afraid of attracting unwantedattention or energy, and don’t trust themselves to know how to dealwith it. Some people are afraid of feeling too sensitive and vulner-able and not knowing how to protect themselves. Others are afraidof being too “spaced out;” they use their weight to ground them.If you have these fears, you can diet forever and you will not loseweight or keep it off because you are unconsciously needing it.
This is why the process of assertion is so vital. When you
learn to back up your feelings with action, you create an internalstrength and protection. Y ou feel safe to move into new situationsand attract attention and energy, knowing that you will be able tosay “no” to anything that doesn’t feel good to you. Y ou know thatyou will be true to yourself and take good care of yourself. Y ourfemale aspect feels safe and supported, knowing that your innermale will back her up.218 •Living in the LightLIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 218My experience has been that once people learn assertion, they
are able to lose weight more easily and naturally without depriva-tion. The increased energy circulation in their bodies dissolves theblocked energy and the extra weight gradually melts away. They nolonger need it for strength or protection, so they release it effort-lessly. If any particular diet is needed, they are guided to the appro-priate nutritionist or diet plan; or, they feel intuitively what theyneed to be eating, and find it appropriate and enjoyable to do so.
Waiting = Excess W eight
If you’re always waiting to be, do, or have what you want, your
energy gets blocked and your body may reflect this in excessweight. By expressing yourself directly and doing what you wantwhen you want (asserting yourself), energy will move freelythrough your body and this circulation will dissolve excess weight.The more you’re willing to be yourself, the less you’ll need to usefood as a substitute nurturer; you’ll be receiving the natural nur-turing of the universe.
The key to self-assertion is to take action on your feelings and
intuition. I’ve seen people lose weight simply by doing somethingthey’ve been afraid to do or by expressing some feeling they’ve suppressed. By continuing to do this, you dissolve blocks and yourweight balances out.
At first, the prospect of asserting yourself moment to moment
can be frightening. We’re not used to stating what we need and tak-ing action to give it to ourselves. It takes a conscious effort to tuneinto how we feel and risk doing it. Once you start doing thisYour Perfect Body   •   219LIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 219though, it feels so good that you’ll want to keep doing it. Y ou’ll
lose weight, have more energy, and look more alive and beautiful.There really is no turning back. The alternative is numbness anddeath. Every time I follow my inner voice, I feel more life energyflowing through me. Every time I go against it, I can feel a strug-gle in my body, and a heaviness and tiredness. If I continue to pushmyself past what my body wants, I become increasingly tired andlifeless.
One of my clients was about eighty pounds overweight when
she started working with me. She tried every conceivable weight-loss program in an effort to lose weight but had not successfullysolved her problem. Then, as she learned how to trust and takecare of herself, she began to heal herself by expressing her sup-pressed feelings. At a weekly support group that I led, she wasencouraged to express herself directly, saying what she felt andwhat she wanted. She began to trust her body and started eatingonly what she really wanted. She grew physically and spirituallylighter, and after a few months, she had lost about forty pounds.
At this point, she thought she’d gotten all she needed from the
group and wanted to drop out, even though she was still carryinga lot of excess weight. I felt that she was still holding back a lot offeelings, however, so I encouraged her to express what she was still“waiting” to say. She shared that three members in the group hadstarted to bother her and she didn’t feel safe in sharing her feelingswith them. They reminded her of people and painful events fromher past. In them, she saw her husband, her son, and herself mir-rored. They reminded her of things she had not said or done. Theyreminded her of self-betrayal. Because of this, she felt angry every220 •Living in the LightLIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 220time she looked at them.
I encouraged her to work with me privately on these issues, and
if she was willing, to come back to the group and express her feel-ings with group members. She needed to say what she had not saidin the past. She did do this. Because of this, she began to heal herold emotional wounds and forgive herself for the past. Her energyis no longer tied to the past, so it can move more freely throughher body. She continued to lose weight without overly restrictivedieting.
Pacing with Food
People use food to pace their natural energy level. If you’re a
person who has too much nervous energy, you may use it to slowyourself down, or if you feel a need for a pick-up, you may use it forthat. Both ultimately lead to a partial suppression of your true ener-gy.
People are generally frightened of their power and energy, so
they feel the need to pace the degree to which it flows throughthem. Some people use food to do this. Others use drugs, alcohol,relationships, work, or various other addictions. As people becomemore willing to experience and express their natural energy, theneed to use food or other substances in this way will lessen.
Appreciating Y our Body
Appreciate the beauty in your body and in yourself, today.
Focus on what you do like about yourself. The more willing youare to do this, the easier it will become. Y our body will respond toYour Perfect Body   •   221LIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 221this appreciation and grow increasingly beautiful.
It’s become a habit to see what needs to be changed about our-
selves. We’re waiting for perfection before we’ll love ourselves com-pletely. Y ou can change these self-critical tapes by looking at whatyou like about yourself and giving yourself positive feedback.
If you have trouble appreciating yourself, start by looking at
others who have the same qualities you have and admire them.
A friend of mine who considered herself twenty pounds over-
weight was continually putting herself down for the way shelooked. She felt the only way she could possibly like herself wouldbe if she were thin. Because she could not see her own beauty, shethought she’d start by looking at women who had a similar bodytype and learn to appreciate them. She started to see how beauti-ful other “overweight” women were and noticed how sensual andalive they looked. She started complimenting others on their looks.By doing this, she could look at her own body in a new way. Shebegan to accept and appreciate herself. Her body responded to this approval with more life and energy. She gradually lost a fewpounds and has continued to appreciate her body as it is.
Ritual for Loving Y our Body
Stand naked in front of a full-length mirror. Send positive
thoughts to every part of your body. Even if you don’t like yourbody, or don’t approve of certain parts of your body, look forsomething of beauty in every part of yourself. Realize that yourbody has been serving you for years. Thank your body for its ser-222 •Living in the LightLIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 222vice.
For example, you might say to yourself, “Y ou have beautiful,
thick, shiny hair.” Then look in the mirror at your hair and see itsbeauty, its shine and glow — even if it isn’t shining and glowing asmuch as you’d like. Continue to appreciate yourself as you are, say-ing, “I love the way you look. Y ou have beautiful hands. Y ou havestrong healthy legs. Y ou have clear skin. Y ou have shining eyes.”
Run through each part of your body in this way and really
send it love and appreciation. Find a way to appreciate every partof yourself. And thank your body for being with you for howevermany years, following your desires and serving you. It has beendoing for you what you have asked of it. If you like, you can playmusic that you love, and use candles or flowers while performingthis ritual. Do this ritual once or twice a day for at least a week.This ritual shows your body how much you appreciate and respectit. Y our body has been criticized, judged, and rejected by you foryears. It will respond quickly to love and energy. Y ou will feellighter and more energized. Y ou will start looking more beautiful.The lines in your face will relax. Y ou will start to glow withstrength and health. Y ou will be amazed at the results of lovingyour body.
Exercise
1. List all the ways you see yourself waiting (weighting). What
are you waiting to say, do, have, or become?
2. Next to each item on your list, write how you can take
action. What can you do to change the waiting into saying, doing,Your Perfect Body   •   223LIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 223or having what you want now?
Chapter Twenty-One
Life and Death
Life is the choice to follow the flow of energy within us. Death
is the choice to block or go against this life energy. We are facedwith this life-or-death choice every moment of our lives.
Each time that we choose to trust and follow our intuition, our
channel opens more, and more of the life force flows through. Thecells of our body actually receive more energy and are renewed andrevitalized faster. Physically, emotionally, and mentally we feelmore alive, and more of our spiritual light can shine through. Ourbody stays young, healthy, and beautiful, and radiates vitality.
When we choose not to follow our intuitive promptings, we
224LIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 224close off our channel and our cells receive less energy. The body
begins to deteriorate faster. When we aren’t following the flow ofenergy, life becomes a struggle. Stress and strain take their toll onthe physical form and we can see the struggle in our faces and bod-ies. Lines of worry form and the body begins to bend with theeffort it is making. If we continue to choose to close off the ener-gy moment after moment, day after day, year after year, eventuallythe body will age, deteriorate, and die. If we change our patternand begin to trust ourselves more, the body will begin to berenewed.
A part of all of us wants life, wants to make the commitment
to live, and is willing to trust our intuition and follow it frommoment to moment. There’s also a part of us that doesn’t trustourselves: “I can’t do this; it’s too much, too intense; I don’t wantto surrender.” When we go against ourselves, we experience onlyeffort and struggle; when we surrender to life, we feel passion,aliveness, and flow.
Any time somebody dies, they are consciously or unconscious-
ly choosing to leave this physical body. It may appear that they’revictims of a disaster or a deadly disease, but on a soul level, theyare in charge of their own journey. Their spirit knows what it’sdoing, although the personality may not. Some souls come in tophysical form to accomplish a specific purpose and having accom-plished it, they leave; or, failing to accomplish it, they may decideto move on to another realm, or perhaps come back to this one inanother life. Some beings feel they’ve gotten stuck and it’s notworking. They feel like they’re not learning fast enough. “This life225 •Life and DeathLIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 225started with too many negative odds against me. I don’t want to
deal with this anymore. I’d rather start over.”
By consciously making a choice for life, you influence the
choice of those around you. Moment by moment, if you chooseto trust your intuition and act on it, you’re choosing alivenessrather than death, and you’re increasing the aliveness that radiatesfrom you. Anybody who is connected with you will feel this and itwill strengthen the choice they make to live.
The more we choose to follow the life force, the healthier and
more vital our bodies will become. By living as channels for theuniverse, it’s possible to become more energetic, alive, and beauti-ful as we get older, rather than less so. We will no longer leave ourbodies unconsciously, through accident or illness. We will stay inthe physical body as long as we desire, and will make the consciouschoice to leave at whatever time we desire to do something else.Death, when we choose it, will not be a tragedy, but a conscioustransition into another realm.
Meditation
Sit or lie in a comfortable position. Close your eyes. T ake sev-
eral deep breaths and relax your body. With each breath, let go ofeverything in the way of being with yourself. Slowly relax into thatcore place within.
Recall a recent situation where you chose not to follow your
energy, when you did not do what you wanted to do. Replay thisscene in your mind. See yourself going against what you knew to226 •Living in the LightLIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 226be true for you. Then, notice how you looked and felt physically,
mentally, emotionally, and spiritually.
Now, go back to that same situation and see yourself doing
exactly what you want to do; see yourself choosing to follow theenergy. Then, notice how your body feels, notice how you look andfeel about yourself. Spend a few minutes feeling what it’s like totrust yourself and act on what you want.
Exercise
Keep a journal of some of the decisions you made during the
day. Notice when you did what you wanted and when you chosenot to. Then, write how you felt about the choices you made.Notice how you felt physically and emotionally.
As you become more aware of when you follow your energy,
when you go against it, and the results of each, you’ll increasinglychoose life and aliveness in each moment.Life and Death   •   227LIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 227Chapter Twenty-Two
Transforming Our W orld
Transformation begins on an individual level and moves out
into the world. The more I’m learning to trust my intuition andact on it, and the more I’m willing to experience and accept all myfeelings, the more the energy of the universe can move through me.As it comes through, it heals and transforms me and everyone andeverything around me.
This is true for each one of us. The more you are willing to
trust and be yourself, the more life energy will move through you. Everyone around you will benefit from your energy and begin to trust and be more themselves. In turn, they become pow-erful channels for everyone in their sphere of influence. And so,transformation spreads rapidly throughout the world.
228LIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 228Y ou may have heard of the “hundredth-monkey syndrome.” In
Japan, in 1952, scientists were studying the behavior of wild mon-keys. The principle food of these monkeys was sweet potatoes.One day, they noticed one monkey do something they had neverseen before — she washed her potato before she ate it. She repeat-ed this behavior on subsequent days, and soon they noticed sever-al other monkeys washing their potatoes before eating them. Moreand more monkeys began to do this. Then, in 1958, after all mon-keys on the island were exhibiting this new behavior, scientists onnearby islands began to report that monkeys on their islands werealso beginning to wash their potatoes. There was no physical con-nection between the islands, and no one had transported any mon-keys from one island to another.
This study illustrates something of overwhelmingly powerful
importance for the human race and for our planet. W ashing pota-toes was a new level of evolution for these monkeys, and whenenough of them had accepted it, it was apparently transferred tothe monkeys on surrounding islands without any physical contactor direct communication.
This is how the evolution of consciousness takes place. Every
individual’s consciousness is connected to, and is a part of, themass consciousness. When a small but significant number ofindividuals have moved into a new level of awareness and signif-icantly changed their behavior, that change is felt in the entiremass consciousness. Every other individual is then moved in thedirection of that change. And the whole thing may have startedwith one individual who first made the leap.
So often we look at the world around us and feel terribly help-
less to effect any significant positive change. The world seems so229 •Transforming Our WorldLIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 229big, and in such a mess, and we feel so small and powerless. The
hundredth monkey story helps us to see how powerful one indi-vidual, or a few individuals, can be in transforming the world.
Because the world truly is our mirror, as we change, it must
change. Y ou can see this easily in your personal life. As you devel-op the habit of trusting and taking care of yourself, you will grad-ually release your old patterns. Soon, you notice that your friends,family, and business associates all seem to be feeling and acting dif-ferently, as well. Things that previously frightened and upset youseem to have lost their emotional “charge.” Even the serious prob-lems of the world, while they still concern you, may not seem quiteas scary as before.
The reason for this shift is that you are beginning to feel the
power of the universe inside of you. T o the degree that you experi-ence the presence of the universe in your own body, you don’t feelafraid. Of course, every time you open up to more power, more ofthe old fear gets flushed to the surface and released, so in the heal-ing process, you will experience alternating states of power and fear.Gradually, however, a solid base of trust will be established withinyou. Others will feel this and in it will find the support to open upto more of their own power and truth. The people and thingsaround you will reflect you in increasingly positive ways. The morelight you allow within you, the brighter the world you live in will be.
Creating the Change
One idea I frequently encounter, especially in groups of spiri-
tually oriented people, is that all we have to do to change the world230 •Living in the LightLIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 230is think more positively about it and visualize the change we desire.
Visualization and affirmation are powerful tools. I use them oftenand strongly recommend them as part of this process. (After all, Iwrote 
Creative Visualization and I deeply believe in the effectiveness
of the techniques it describes.) There is another part of theprocess that is frequently ignored, however, yet it is just as impor-tant.
If the world is our mirror, then whatever we see out there in
some way reflects what is in us. We must take responsibility for itand be willing to transform it 
within ourselves if we want to see it
change on the outside. So, when we look at the world and seepoverty, pain, violence, and chaos, we must be willing to say toourselves, “What is the poverty, pain, violence, and chaos withinme that this is reflecting? I know that my world is my mirror and,in a sense, my creation. If the things I see weren’t in me, theycouldn’t exist in the world.”
The trick here is not to take on
blame orguilt for the world’s
problems. None of us is truly responsible for other people’s lives;we are all co-creating this world together. And we are all doing thebest we know how. We are here to learn from what is not perfectrather than blame ourselves for it. We need to adopt a positive atti-tude of responsibility, saying, “I am willing to learn to trust and fol-low my own inner truth, knowing that as I do, I will release the painand fear within me and thus heal the pain and fear in the world.”
Such a vow is very powerful and to follow through on it is no
easy task. T o do so, we must be willing to move through the deep-est layers of our consciousness and recognize not only our ownpersonal fears, but also centuries-old negative beliefs of humanityTransforming Our World   •   231LIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 231that exist in our bodies. T o move through these layers, we need to
be willing to recognize and experience all the fears, knowing thatthe light is healing and dissolving them.
When people ask me what they can do about the problems of
the world, I suggest that they start by recognizing and affirmingthat as they sincerely do their own inner work, the world is beingtransformed. I tell them to look at the social problems that fright-en or disturb them and determine what fear or pain it toucheswithin them and how it reflects their personal situation.
For example, if they are disturbed by reports of violence, I ask
them to look at how violence has played a part in their lives. Hassomeone been violent toward them in their early years? Have theyhad violent thoughts and feelings? Have they repressed or disasso-ciated from their own violent feelings? In what way have they doneviolence to themselves internally (harshly criticizing themselves,and so on)?
It has been my experience that many of us need help, in the
form of supportive therapy or counseling, to deal with deep levelsof emotional healing. For some people, there’s a certain reluctanceto seek such help, perhaps because they fear it’s an indication ofsickness or craziness. Our culture tells us that we should be total-ly self-sufficient and that needing help is a sign of weakness. Inreality, we all need support at times, and it is a sign of strength toreach out for appropriate help. Personally, I have sought therapy ofvarious types at many times in my life and it has helped me great-ly, as long as I trusted my own intuition about who to work with.
If you are deeply touched by the poverty in which much of the232 •Living in the LightLIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 232world’s population is currently living, you may feel moved to make
some external gestures to help alleviate someone’s pain (i.e., con-tribute some money, do some social or political work). At the sametime, look within yourself to see in what way you believe in, orsupport, poverty or scarcity in your own life. This may not be aquestion of money — you may be living in some form of emo-tional or spiritual poverty while surrounded by material luxury. Or,you may be at peace spiritually and emotionally but holding ontoa belief that money is evil, thus keeping yourself in a state offinancial poverty.
Poverty, on both a personal and worldwide level, is supported
by our mass consciousness belief in scarcity. We deeply fear thatthere is
not enough to go around of whatever we need — money,
food, love, energy, appreciation. So, we create a world that supportsthat belief. There have been studies that show that there is plentyof food produced in this world to amply feed everyone. Y et,because of our underlying belief in poverty, we allow food to bethrown away in one place while millions are starving to death else-where.
If you are concerned by environmental issues, consider this
point of view: Mother Nature is symbolic of the nurturing, fem-inine aspect of ourselves. Disrespect and lack of harmony withnature are only possible in a society of individuals who disrespectand disregard their own feminine, intuitive nature. If you areattuned to your inner guidance, there is no way you can becomeseverely out of balance with your natural environment.
Just as our bodies are the manifestation of our consciousnessTransforming Our World   •   233LIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 233in physical form, the earth is the manifestation of our mass con-
sciousness. In a sense, the earth is our collective “body.” The waywe treat her mirrors the way we treat our own bodies.
The lack of respect and attunement afforded to our bodies is
demonstrated on a global level by the way we treat our earth. Untilwe learn to love and trust our bodies, to listen to their signals, togive them the food, rest, and nurturing they need, to stop pollut-ing them with drugs and unwholesome food, and to stop trying tocontrol them with our ideas about what’s right, I believe we willcontinue to mistreat our “earth body.”
We must be willing to recognize and heal any form of vio-
lence, poverty, and imbalance within ourselves as individuals if wehope to eradicate these problems from our world. Healing doesnot take place on a personal or planetary level as long as we hideor deny our feelings. All feelings, beliefs, and emotional patternsmust be brought to the light of consciousness in order to be trans-formed. When the light shines into the darkness, the darkness dis-appears.
W orld Healing
People frequently talk about what terrible shape the world is in.
In many ways, things seem to be going from bad to worse, and thiscan be very frightening. It has helped me considerably to recognizethat the world is currently going through a major healing crisis,very similar in form to what many individuals are experiencing.
When we as individuals begin to wake up to the light, we also234 •Living in the LightLIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 234begin to become aware of the darkness in which we have been liv-
ing. The patterns of living which formerly seemed “normal” beginto look crazier and crazier from the perspective of our newlyacquired sanity. Fears and distortions that have been denied andignored because they were too painful to look at begin to comeinto our consciousness in order to be released. Problems that were“swept under the rug” come forth to be solved.
This is what I see happening on a worldwide level today. If we
recognize the seeming chaos and pain in the world as a giant man-ifestation of our individual healing process, we can see that it’s avery positive step. Rather than feeling like victims, we can recog-nize the power of the universe at work. We can appreciate our-selves as channels through which the world’s healing is beingmanifested.*
Social and Political Action
Some who have heard these ideas become angry because they
believe I am endorsing a narcissistic self-absorption that denies theproblems of the world and negates the necessity of social andpolitical action. Upon further discussion, I am usually (though notalways!) able to make them understand that this is not the case.Being willing to deal internally and individually with the originalsource of the problem is simply the most practical and powerfulTransforming Our World   •   235
*For more of my thoughts on this topic, read The Path of Transformation: How Healing
Ourselves Can Change the World.LIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 235way to effect real change. It does not deny the necessity of exter-
nal action on a large scale.
The issue for me is the source and motivation for that action.
I find that people are frequently moved by their own “good ideas”more than by their inner guidance. Often they are motivated bytheir feelings of pain, fear, and guilt into wanting to “do somethingto make it better.” They are coming from a position of helpless-ness and fear, struggling vainly to do something to eradicate thesefeelings. Unfortunately, this approach only perpetuates the prob-lem it is trying to solve.
The underlying cause of the world problems is the pain, fear,
and ignorance we experience from being disconnected from thepower of the universe. If we continue to project our problems out-side of ourselves and fail to recognize the inner power we actuallyhave, I believe we will support the very evils we are fighting.
On the other hand, if we are willing to take responsibility for
our fears and deal with them, we will clear the way for being ableto hear the voice of the universe within us. If it tells us to takeaction, we can be sure the action will be powerful and truly effec-tive.
For example, a woman friend of mine became very active in the
nuclear disarmament movement. When she talked about the issueand her work, it was obvious that she was feeling absolutely terrifiedof the possibility of nuclear war. This is actually a reasonable reac-tion, given the world situation. The problem, as I saw it, was thatshe was not recognizing her own terror and the issues of powerless-ness and death that she was struggling with internally. So, heractions and words had a frantic quality — almost like a drowning236 •Living in the LightLIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 236person clutching vainly for something to hold onto.
Gradually, over several years, I saw her work through this phase
of her process. I believe that she reached a deeper level of trust inthe universe. She continued her anti-nuclear activity because it wassomething she deeply believed in, and found great satisfaction indoing so, but the energy was quite different. There was power andstrength in her involvement, which I’m certain made her moreeffective in her work.
The same principles hold true in the social and political arena
as in every other area of life: If you are doing what you think you“should” do, if you are motivated primarily by fear and guilt, thenno matter how good your actions, you are probably not being aseffective as you’d like to be, and you may even be hindering morethan you are helping.
On the other hand, if you are trusting your intuition and fol-
lowing your heart — going where your energy takes you and doingwhat you really want to do — you will see that 
everything you do
has a positive effect in changing the world. Y ou will be able to rec-ognize the transformational nature of your actions. For many, thiswill include direct social and political action, and you’ll be doingit because you love it! People around you will also be affected byyour energy and vitality even more than they are affected by yourwords and actions.
For now, my inner guidance had told me that living my life as
I do — writing books, leading workshops, exploring my creativi-ty, being myself — is what I personally need to be doing to effectmaximum change in my life and the world. I’ve also gotten a strongfeeling that I may someday be actively involved in politics (as I wasTransforming Our World   •   237LIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 237earlier in my life) — perhaps even occupy a political office of
some sort! Although I have no particular desire to do this at thistime, I know that if that’s what I’m meant to do, I’ll find it anexciting adventure. I’m curious to see what the universe has in storefor me.The Media
I was once informed by my inner guidance that television
would be the savior of the world! I resisted this idea because I amnot a TV buff. I did recognize, however, that as mindless and idi-otic as much television programming may appear at this time, tele-vision is obviously an extraordinarily powerful tool for reachingmillions of people instantaneously. I think it is no accident that ithas been developed at this time and is to be found in most homesin the world.
Although currently controlled primarily by people whose con-
sciousness is thoroughly embedded in the old world, there are, evennow, occasional flashes of awareness. It is only a matter of timeuntil new world consciousness begins to penetrate television pro-gramming in a regular and significant way.
T elevision is undoubtedly a major educational tool. With the
universe in charge, it can literally become a “channel.” It could pro-vide a “network” for instantaneously reaching a majority of theworld population with conscious and creative new ideas.
Can you imagine housewives watching soap operas in which
people go through all the usual human dramas, but instead of thetypical doom and despair, there is an attitude of learning and238 •Living in the LightLIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 238growing through life’s changes? It could be highly entertaining,
with all the usual sex and romance, birth and death, drugs and dis-ease, marriage and divorce, but the characters could be seen to usetheir trials and tribulations in a positive way to evolve in con-sciousness, just as we are learning to do. Once the housewives getit, it’s certain that children and husbands will get it in short order!
It’s obvious that the power of the media — movies, radio,
newspapers, magazines, and books, as well as television — isunmatched in its potential for fast positive change once our massconsciousness is ready for that shift.
A Five-Step Process for 
Personal and Planetary Healing
1. Affirm to yourself:
The power of the universe is healing and
transforming me .As I am healed and transformed, the whole world is
healed and transformed.
2. Notice the social, political, and environmental issues around
you. Pay particular attention to those that trigger the most emo-tional reaction in you. Ask to see how they may reflect your per-sonal issues, fears, beliefs, and patterns. Y ou may not immediatelysee any connection, but stay open to receiving this informationthrough your intuitive channel.
3. Ask for the higher power of the universe to release and heal
the ignorance, fear, and limitation within you and in the world. Beopen to any inner guidance you may receive to seek support in yourhealing process through a counselor or therapist, friends, a work-Transforming Our World   •   239LIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 239shop or group, or in any other form.
4. Regularly visualize your life and the world as you would like
them to be (see the meditation at the end of this chapter).
5. Ask your inner guidance to let you know clearly if there is
any specific action you need to take toward your own, or theworld’s, healing. Then, continue to trust and follow your intuition,knowing that you will be led to do whatever is necessary.
Meditation
Sit or lie in a comfortable position. T ake a few deep breaths
and relax your body. Feel yourself dropping into a deep, quietplace within. Feel yourself contacting that place of power and cre-ativity, your source of strength.
From this source of strength, project yourself into the future,
a few years or more, and in this projection, imagine your life exact-ly the way you want it to be.
Start by noticing how you feel spiritually and emotionally. Feel
the strength and power within you. Y ou trust your intuition andact on your inner guidance. Because of this, your life is unfoldingin a wonderful way.
Get a sense of your body. How do you look and feel physical-
ly? Y ou now have a body that matches your spirit — strong, coura-geous, beautiful, filled with life and energy. Experience what thatfeels like. How do you take care of your body? What do you eatand how do you nurture yourself ?
Imagine yourself dressed exactly the way you want to be240 •Living in the LightLIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 240dressed. Y our clothes express who you are. When you open your
closets and drawers, you have just the clothes you want there.
What is your home like? See yourself living exactly where you
want to be. Y ou have created your environment as you want it. Feelwhat it’s like to live in a way that suits you perfectly.
Y ou have found the perfect job and creative outlet. Imagine
expressing yourself in a way that brings you fulfillment and satis-faction. Y ou receive an abundance of money for doing what youmost love.
Y ou now have relationships that are honest, alive, passionate,
and creative. People love and nurture you. If you have (or want tohave) a special partner in your life, imagine that relationship as youwould like it to be.
Now, remember that the world is your mirror. As you are
growing and changing, so is the world around you. In fact, you arepart of the mass consciousness that is creating the world. So letyourself imagine the world healing and transforming, coming intobalance, wholeness, and harmony, just as you are.Transforming Our World   •   241LIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 241Chapter Twenty-Three
A Vision
From the window of my apartment, I look across the San
Francisco Bay at the beautiful city of San Francisco. The light onthe water and on the city skyline is constantly changing. Sometimesit is cloudy and misty, sometimes bright and shining, but it alwayslooks mystical. Perhaps this view inspired an image that I frequent-ly have:
I see an ancient city, gray and decaying. It is literally disinte-
grating, the old structures crumbling into piles of rubble. But it isbeing pushed aside because in its place, a beautiful new city is aris-ing. This new city is magical — it seems to shimmer delicatelywith every color in the universe. I know that it is being built inside
242LIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 242of us. It is created from the light.
Recommended Resources
Books
Gawain, Shakti. Creative Visualization. Nataraj/New World Library, 1978.
Gawain, Shakti. Return to the Garden. Nataraj/New World Library, 1989.
Gawain, Shakti. The Path of Transformation: How Healing Ourselves Can
Change the World. Nataraj/New World Library, 1993.
Gawain, Shakti. The Four Levels of Healing: A Guide to Balancing the
Spiritual, Mental, Emotional, and Physical Aspects of Life. Nataraj/New
World Library, 1997.
Gawain, Shakti. Creating True Prosperity. Nataraj/New World Library, 1997.
Gawain, Shakti. Creating True Prosperity Workbook. Nataraj/New World
243LIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 243Library, 1998.
Roberts, Jane. The Nature of Personal Reality. Amber-Allen Publishing/New
World Library, 1994.
Stone, Hal and Sidra. Embracing Our Selves: The V oice Dialogue Manual.
Nataraj/New World Library, 1993.
Stone, Hal and Sidra. Embracing Each Other: Relationship as Teacher, Healer,
and Guide. Nataraj/New World Library, 1993.
Stone, Sidra. The Shadow King, Nataraj/New World Library, 1997.
Audio Tapes
Gawain, Shakti. Living in the Light: Book on Tape. Revised version.
Nataraj/New World Library, 1998.
Gawain, Shakti. Creative Visualization: Book on Tape. Nataraj/New World
Library, 1995.
Gawain, Shakti. Creative Visualization Meditations. Nataraj/New World
Library, 1996.
Gawain, Shakti. The Path of Transformation: Book on Tape. Abridged version.
Nataraj/New World Library, 1993.
Gawain, Shakti. The Four Levels of Healing: A Guide to Balancing the
Spiritual, Mental, Emotional, and Physical Aspects of Life. Nataraj/New
World Library, 1997.
Gawain, Shakti. Creating True Prosperity: Book on Tape. Nataraj/New World
Library, 1997.
Stone, Hal and Sidra. Meeting Your Selves. Delos, 1990.
Stone, Hal and Sidra. The Child Within. Delos, 1990.
Stone, Hal and Sidra. Meet Your Inner Critic. Delos, 1990.
Stone, Hal and Sidra. Meet the Pusher. Delos, 1990.244 •Living in the LightLIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 244Stone, Hal and Sidra. The Dance of Selves in Relationship. Delos, 1990.
Stone, Hal and Sidra. Understanding Your Relationships. Delos, 1990.
Stone, Hal and Sidra. Affair and Attractions, Delos, 1990.
Stone, Hal and Sidra. Decoding Your Dreams. Delos, 1990.
(All of Hal and Sidra Stone’s tapes are available through Delos. See address
below.)
W orkshops
Shakti Gawain gives talks and leads workshops all over the United States andin many other countries. She also conducts retreats, intensives, and trainingprograms. If you would like to be on her mailing list and receive workshopinformation, contact:
S
HAKTI GA WAIN ,INC.
P.O. B OX377, M ILLVALLEY , CA 94942
TELEPHONE : (415) 388-7140
FAX: (415) 388-7196
E-MAIL:SG@NATARAJ .COM
WWW .SHAKTIGA WAIN .COM
Shakti and her husband, Jim Burns, rent rooms and a guests cottage at their
beautiful estate on the Hawaiian island of Kaua’i. For information or to makea reservation, contact:
K
AIMANA
P.O. B OX612, K ILAUEA , HI 96754
TELEPHONE : (808) 828-6670 OR(800) 837-1784
FAX: (808) 828-6670
For information about Drs. Hal and Sidra Stone’s workshops and trainings,
contact:
DELOS
P.O. B OX604, A LBION , CA 95410
TELEPHONE : (707) 937-2424
E-MAIL:DELOS @MCN.ORGRecommended Resources   •   245LIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 245Nataraj Publishing, a division of New World Library,
is dedicated to publishing books and tapes
that inspire and challenge us to improve the 
quality of our lives and our world.
Our books and tapes are available
in bookstores everywhere.
For a catalog of our complete library
of fine books and cassettes contact:
Nataraj Publishing/New World Library
14 Pamaron W ay
Novato, CA 94949
T el: (415) 884-2100
Fax: (415) 884-2199
Or call toll-free: (800) 972-6657
Catalog requests: Ext. 50
Ordering: Ext. 52
E-mail: escort@nwlib.com
http://www.nwlib.comLIL Quark-Part Two  1/22/01  8:52 AM  Page 246